General Disclaimer
One or more of the Following Statements may affect this Document

This document has been reproduced from the best copy furnished by the
organizational source. It is being released in the interest of making available as
much information as possible.

This document may contain data, which exceeds the sheet parameters. It was
furnished in this condition by the organizational source and is the best copy
available.

This document may contain tone-on-tone or color graphs, charts and/or pictures,
which have been reproduced in black and white.

This document is paginated as submitted by the original source.

Portions of this document are not fully legible due to the historical nature of some
of the material. However, it is the best reproduction available from the original
submission.

Produced by the NASA Center for Aerospace Information (CASI)

	
AMRL-'TR-68-146

T'

FIRE PROTECTION AND RECOMPRESSION
SYSTEMS FOR A HYPOBARIC
RESEAR(.;H CHAMBER
WILLIAM BROWN
Fa i rchild Hiller Corporation
EDWARD LEDOUX
WILLIAM MAILLOUX
Fenwell Incorporated
JOHN A. BROWN

311 2 3 9s
^1

w

-0	

EARL L. SAYRE

COURTNEY A. METZGER
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory

3,
glZ^g

FEBRUARY 1969

W	
7	
_	

0
Q

^	

W

u

C ? r
1

It
Or a
W
^
1

_+
'

4
^ o

u
"

^Q
U
a

f ^^

zoo WNOI A11113VA

N

t

This document has been approved for public
release and sale; its distribution is unlimited,

AEROSPACE MEDICAL RESEARCH LABORATORY
AEROSPACE MEDICAL DIVISION
AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE, OHIO

f^

4

'4' ,

..W,

NOTICES

When US Government drawings, specifications, or other data are used for any purpose other than
a definitely related Goverpment procurement operation, the Government thereby incurs no responsibility nor any obligation whatsoever, and the fact that the Government may have formulated, furnished, or ir. any way supplied the said drawings, specifications, or other data, is not to be regarded
by implication or otherwise, as in any manner licensing the holder or any other person or corporation, or conveying any rights or permission to manufacture, use, or sell any patented invention
that may in airy way be related thereto.

Federal Government agenci,^s and their contractors registered with Defense Documentation Center
(DDC) should direct requests for copies of this report to:

DDC
Cameron Station
Alexandria, Virginia 22314
Non-DDC users may purchase copies of this report from:
Chief, Storage and Dissemination Section
Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific & Technical Information (CFSTI)
Sills Building
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22151

Organizations and individuals receiving reports via the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories'
automatic iiiailing lists should submit the addressograph plate stamp on the report envelope or refer
to the code number when corresponding about change of address or cancellation.
Do not return this copy. Retain or destroy.

700 - July 1969 - C0455 - 82-1812

6

AMRL-TR-68-146

FIRE PROTECTION AND RECOMPRESSION
SYSTEMS FOR A HYPOBARIC
RESEARCH CHAMBER
WILLIAM BROWN
EDWARD LEDOUX
WILLIAM MAIL"OUX
JOHN A. BROWN
EARL L. SAYRE
COURTNEY A. METZGER

This document has been approved for public
release and sale; its distribution is unlimited.

FOREWORD

This work was initiated by the Biomedical Laboratory,
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories*, in support of Project 6373 1 "Equipment for Life Support in Aerospace," and
Tasks 63 -7 305, "Analysis and Integration of Life Support Systems," and 637306, "Aerospace Sanitation and Personal Hygie-ne," Work Unit number 013, "Life Support in Simulated Aerospace System Environments." Dr. Alton E. Prince, Biotechnology Branch, Life Support Division, was the contract monitor
for the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory for Contract
F33615-67-C-1833 with the Republic Aviation Division (RAD)
of the Fairchild Hiller Corporation, Farmingdale, New York
11735. Dr. Hugo Freudenthal was the principal investigator
for RAD. Mr. William Brown was prcject engineer and Mr.
Philip Cooper was site manager for RAD. Mr. John A. Brown
was the project engineer for the Air Force; Mr. Earl L.
Sayre, facilities engineering technician; and Mr. Courtney
A. Metzger, task supervisor. This phase of the effort was
started in July 1967 and was completed in December 1967.
Fenwal Incorporated designed and installed the flame
and smoke detection reaction systems and supervisory systems.
Mr. George Grabowski of Fenwal Incorporated was manager;
Mr. Parker Peterson, assistant manager; Mr. Edward Ledoux,
advanced systems; Mr. William Mailloux, field engineer; and
Mr. John Olszewski, engineer. The Viking Sprinkler Company
designed and installed the water distribution_ and control
systems from tank exit through spray nozzles. Viking
Sprinkler design was by Mr. H. W. Maxwell; Mr. George Wirsch,
sales-design; and Mr. Allen Robertson, installation foreman.
The authors acknowledge the invaluable assistance of the
following Air Force personnel. Lt. Col. Paul E. Hoffman,
USAF, MC, Chief, Life Support Division. Also Mr. Harry
Ficht.horn, electronic technician; Mr. Ohmer Schurr, sheet
meta technician; and Mr. Homer Tompkins, electrical technician; all of the Division of Flight Test for their continuing service in sustaining the capabilities of this facility; Master Sergeant E. D. Berry and Master Sergeant R. J.
Ford for their services as both engineering technicians and
physiological chamber operators to this facility.
This technical reF,-)rt ,.as been reviewed and is approved.
C. 71', KRATOCHVIL, COLONEL, USAF, MC
Commander
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory
*The name of our organization was changed ir. December 1968.
ii

R

ABSTRACT
A fire detection-extinguishment system and an automatic rapid recompression system for a hypobaric man-rated research
chamber are described. Both systems are the result of recent Air
Force directives to enhance the safety of human subjects confined to aerospace simulators under conditions of altered gaseous atmosphe. -es. Installation, operation, and maintenance instructions are included. Ultraviolet detectors are used for
detection of flame or arcing; reaction systems are triggered
either automatically by the ultraviolet detectors, manual electric or manual hydraulic switching. Should the manual modes be
used to monitor the chamber interior, the ultraviolet detectors
merely set off audio and visual alarms. Smoke detectors merely
set of- audio and visual alarms. Water supply for 60 seconds
.delivery capacity is maintained at 100 psi gage. The engineering approach used for the installation design of the water
sprinkler system into the chamber is unique in configuration
while meeti:lg Air Force requirements for both water pattern and
flow rate of 7.5 gallons per minute per square foot of floor area.
Response time between automatic detector sensing and water delivery at a transient pressure of 35 psi gage at the sprinkler has
been measured as 110 milliseconds. An on-off-reset-repeat detection-control system iG used. The automated recompression system
parallels a previously installed recompression system judged inadequate. All systems use 24 vdc power; conventional and emergency power sources are discussed. An array of installed alarms
is described.

iii

f

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
I	

II	

III	

IV	

	

Page
INTRODUCTION	 .	
Objective	
Background	
Approach	 .	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	 .	 .	 .	
.	 .	 .	 .	
.	 .	 .	 .	
.	 .	 .	 .	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	

.
.
.
.

.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	

.	
.	
.	
.	

1
1
1
3

.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	

.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	

4
4
4
4

.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	

.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	

23
23
25
25
26
28
28

.	 . .	 .	
.	 . .	 .	
.	 . .	 .	

.	
.	
.	

30
30

DESIGN	 METHOD	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .. .	
Fire Protection and Recompression System
Automatic Fire Detection and Actuation .	
Ultraviolet Radiation Detection	 . .	
Actuation	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Smoke	 Detection	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Rapid Recompression System .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Rapid Recompression	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Exhaust Manifold Valve 	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Manual Actuation	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Extinguishment	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Spray Nozzles and Piping	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Nozzle Control Valves 	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Water System Features	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Emergency Control Console 	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Control	 Panel	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Aft Crew Cabin Supervisory Panel . .	
Forward Crew Cabin Supervisory Panel
Detector Supervisory Panel	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Reaction Time	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Pressurized Water System	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Water Level	 Indicator	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Power	 Supplies	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Primary Rectifier Unit 	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Emergency Battery Unit 	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
Alarm	 System	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 . .	
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE	 .	 .	 .	 .	
Safety	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	
Electrical	 Elements	
.	 .	 .	 .	 .	
Water	 Control	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	
Arming the Sprinkler System	 .	
Preventative Maintenance 	 .	 .	 .	
Periodic	 Check	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	
Cleaning	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	

.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .
.	 .	 .	 .

SPARE PARTS AND DRAWINGS	 .	
Spare	 Parts	 List	 .	 .	 .	
Drawing	 List	 .	 .	 .	 .	 .	

.	
.	
.	

1v

.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	

.	 .	
.	 .	
.	 .	

.	
.	
.	

.	

5
6
7
10
10
11

12
12
12
13
14
14
17

18
19

20
20
20
21
21
21
21

29

31

R

LIST OF ILLUSTRATION:
FI3URE

	

Page

1	

Life Support Systems Evaluator
IIypobaric Research Chamber . . . . . . . Frontispiece

2	

Water. Distribution System for
Fire Extinguishment	
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .	

2

Control Room and Life Support
SyEtems Evaluator	
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .	

9

Control Elements for Water
Distribution System	
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .	

27

3	

4	

V

t^^-o:,

WATER SPRAY NOZZLE	

AFT CABIN	
INSIDE DIAMETER	
INSIDE LENGTH	

7.5 FEET	
19.1 FEET	

SMOKE DETECTOR
U V FLAME DETECTOR

FORWARD CABIN
INSIDE DIAMETER TAPERS 7.5 to 3 FEET
INSIDE LENGTH	
8.5 FEET

Figure 1
Fife Support Systems Evaluator Hypobaric Research Chamber

6

SEC PION I
INTRODUCTION
OBJECTIVE
Systems and equipment described 'herein are to serve to enNance the safety of human subjects confined to the Life Support
Systems Evaluator (LSSE) (Figure 1) for continuing periods of up
to 6 months. The LSSE is a man-rated aerospace research altitude
chamber facility available at the Aerospace Medical Research
Laboratory.
BACKGROUND

The occurrences in the last week of January 1967 within the
nation's aerospace program caused extensive reevaluation of all
aspects pertaining to the safety of human personnel. Aerospace
simulators capable of altered gaseous composition of atmosphere
and/or of reduced atmospheric pressure were subjected to inte:isive study. A paramount. United States Air Force directive required that aerospace simulators using oxygen Enriched atmospheres must be equipped with a fire suppression system; furthermore, this suppression system must be capable of being operated
automatically when the simulator is occupied by human subjects.
A rapid recompression system was standard for each simulator;
however, when the recompression system was judged inadequate,
the new recompression system configuration was dictated by the
study team.
The Life Support Systems Evaluator is capable of altered
gaseous composition of the crew cabin atmosphere, operational
with total pressure ranging from 3 to 15 psi absolute with subjects in the "shirt-sleeve" mode, to 100,000 feet altitude with
subjects in full pressure suits and operational with cabin atmospheres of 100% oxygen pressures from 3 to 7 psi absolute, or
comparable oxygen partial pressures. It is also operational over
crew cabin temperatures frcm 55 to 95 Farenheit. This facility
serves as a research tool for determining the technical feasibility of techniques and principles involved in the operation
and design of life support equi pment through integrated evaluation studies. These studies are planned to develop optimal
life support systems, including respiratory equipment, nutritional support, personal hygiene, and waste management. The
broad spectrum of work involved in biologistics and bioastronautics can also be studied.

1

Figure 2
Water Distribution System For Fire Extinguishment

2

APFROACH
Extensive engineering testing at the School of Aerospace
Medicine under Aerospace Medical Division supervisicn during
March-May 1967 verified that water was a suitable extinguishing
agent at a water spray flow of 7.5 gallons (U.S.) deluge per
minute per square foot of floor area. Interpretation of "square
footage of floor area" was conservatively calculated for the
LSSE by using cabin diameter and omitting the effects of tapered
contour.
Forward cabin - 7.5 ft diameter x 10 ft length = 75 square
feet. Flow rate of 7.5 x 75 = 562.5 gallons per minute =
187.5 gallons per 20 seconds.
Aft cabin - 7.5 ft diameter x 20 ft length = 150 square
feet. Flow rate of 7.5 x 150 = 1125 gallons per minute =
375 gallons per 20 seconds.
Base hydrant flows approximating 1700 gallons per minute
revealed insufficient line pressure to develop the desired nozzle spray patterns essential to effective extinguishment. A
pressurized water_' tank was therefore installed (Figure 0.).
Ultraviolet sensors were selected for the automatic detection of flame or arcing coupled with automatic actuation of extinguishment elements. Increasing the percentage of oxygen in
the cabin atmosphere also increases the size of any generated
flame front and its quantity of ultraviolet light. Therefore,
as the fire hazard is increased by increased oxygen percentages,
the ultraviolet sensors can be expected to have shorter response
times to any flame or arc.
The ultraviolet and smoke detectors selected were designed
to operate on a continuous 24 - 28 vdc power supply. All other
components were selected for like characteristics. This therefore assured continuous monitoring-reaction capability by the
incorporation of a battery set to provide power in the event of
a Base power failure.
The rate of recompression desired was one-half pound per
second or 20 seconds maximum; with the expected cabin pressure
of 5 psia, the rates are synonymocs. The desired recompression
time of 20 seconds was obtained with a 3 inch gate valve to the
outer aft chamber (204 cu ft) having a pressure of one-half
pound absolute and a 4 inch orifice on a 6 inch gate valve to
the combined crew cabins (1131 cu ft total) at 5 psi absolute.

3

R

SECTION II
DESIGN METHOD
FIRE PROTECTION AND RECOMPRESSION SYSTEM

A fire detection, suppression, and hypobaric recompression
system, with automatic sensing, controller, and reaction devices,
was developed for the Life Support Systems Evaluator located in
Building 824, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. This system provides recompression, smoke detection, and flame detectionextinguishment for the LSSE. The system operates at maximum performance and re1;.ability in pressures up to and including 100%
oxygen atmospheres using water as the extinguishing agent.
The performance of this protection system is measured by its
ability to detect and respond promptly to the parameters being
monitored. The varied conditions occurring in the Life Support
Systems Evaluator required two modes of automatic detection to
insure reliable and effective p rotection; ultraviolet (U/V)
radiation detection and smoke detection. Current circuitry provides for automatic U/V (flame or arcing) detection and automatic actuation of extinguishment, whereas automatic smoke detection actuates audio and visual alarms only. In addition to
automatic fire detection and extinguishment, there are two methods of manual control incorporated in the system; electrical and
hydraulic.
The rapid recompression system will return the inner and
outer forward and the inner and outer aft crew cabins to exterior ambient pressure in less that 20 seconds from an altitude of
100,000 feet (8.3 mm Hg absolute). In addition to selective
automatic operation as a supplementary fire detection function,
the recompression system can be activated either electrically or
pneumatically.

AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION AND ACTUATION
Ultraviolet Radiation Detection
The forward crew cabin and aft crew cabin of the Life Support Systems Evaluator are continuously monitored for ultraviolet radiation. P/N 90016-2, Ultraviolet Detectors are the U/V
sensors used in this system.

4

The detectors operate on 24 +4 vdc. Optimum response is
obtained when operated between 24 to 28 vdc. Associated relays
are rated 24 +3.6(+15%) vdc. In the event of an external power failure, automatic switching provides power from a 24 vdc
emergency battery unit.
The detectors ha% ,^ a spectral response from 1900 to 2900
angstrom units, a cone of vision greater than 120 degrees, are
unaffected by water spray and are operable to altitudes of
100,000 feet. Within the detector, the 24 vdc is changed to a
chopped 800-volt, 400-cps power supply. However, since this is
encapsulated, the resultant high voltage is not exposed to the
oxygen rich atmosphere of the crew cabin. Additional specifications are included in the system drawings.
Eight U/V detectors are strategically mounted to provide
complete surveillance of the respective crew cabin interiors.
Detectors U/V-1, U/V-2, U/V-3 and U/V-4 are located in the aft
crew cabin and detectors U/V-5, U/V-6, U/V-7, and U/V-8 are
located in the forward crew cabin. U/V-6 is under the forward
cabin floor to provide surveillance in an otherwise blind area.
When any one of these detectors is actuated, the system
will cycle 20 seconds on and 5 seconds off. Once initiated
by a detector, the system cannot be shut off until the 20 second cycle has been completed. (Water flows from nozzles for
20 seconds and is then shut off for 5 seconds.) If at the
end of the first cycle, any detector, other than the smoke
detectors, continues to alarm, the .system will again cycle in
the same manner. This cycling will continue until flames or
electrical arcing are no longer present or until the total
water capacity of 1800 gallons is exhausted.
Actuation
When the control panel power in ON and the key switch is
in the AUTOMATIC position, a signal from a U /V detector will
initiate in less than 200 milliseconds the following corrective actions:
o Command release of water through spray nozzles.
o Start timer for the 20 seconds on, then 5 seconds off
cycle.

5

1

o Shut off Life Support Systems Evaluator power.
o Turn on emergency cabin lighting.
o Isolate smoke detectors.
o Close three separate gas manifold gas shut-off valves
supplying oxygen and other gases to the LSSE crew
cabins.
o Sound Wright-Patterson Base fire alarm. This ADT alarm
control must also be set by a separate key switch.
o Light the chamber or forward cabin fire lights on the
control panel.
o Give intermittent visual indication on detector supervisory panel.
o Operate building audio alarms.
o Operate building visual alarm.
o Operate audio alarm in emergency control console.
o Activate rapid recompression system when system is set
for automatic recompression. Manual pneumatic valve
switches must have been preset in the OFF (neutral)
position.
The aft crew cabin and the forward crew cabin fire detection system function independently. A fire in the aft crew
cabin will not trigger the forward crew cabin extinguishing
system (vice-versa) unless the connecting door between them is
open and a forward crew cabin detector sees the flame or arcing.
Smoke Detection
Both sections of the Life Support Systems Fvaluator are
continuously monitored for the presence of smoke. P/N 90017-3
are the smoke detectors used in this system.
The detectors operate on 24 vdc. In the event of external
power failure, automatic switching provides power from a 24-vdc
emergency battery unit. The detector senses the presence of

6

I

smoke by means of a photocell. The presence of smoke in the
detector's monitoring chamber causes light to reflect to the
photocell thereby triggering the transistorized circuit that
in turn initiates corrective action through the emergency control console. This unit can be damaged by water spray, therefore, it is electrically removed from the detection circuit
during the first system actuation.
The smoke sensors are of the spot type and will respond
within 5.0 seconds after 2 to 4% smoke enters their monitoring
chambers.
Two smoke detector sensors are used in this application,
one is located in the approximate center of each crew cabin
near the ceiling. A signal from either detector will initiate
the same, actions as for the U/V detectors except when jumpers
on terminals 64 and 65 (for aft crew cabin) and on terminals
62 and 63 (for forward crew cabin) are removed. When these
jumpers are removed from the terminals on the rear of the control panel, the audio and visual alarms are the only items
actuated. These jumpers and appropriate instructions regarding their use are located on control panel 91012-0.
NOTE
IT IS RECOMMENDED THAT THE PRESENT SYSTEM OF
OPERATION WITH THE JUMPERS REMOVED BE CONTINUED SO THAT SMOKE DETECTORS SOUND AUDIO
AND LIGHT VISUAL ALARMS ONLY.
When a smoke detector has initiated an alarm and actuaticn of extinguishment, the system will continue to cycle.
After the detector's monitoring chamber is cleared of smoke
or water vapor or both, the detectors are reset by depressing RESET button on control panel 91012-0.
RAPID RECOMPRESSION SYSTEM
The rapid recompression system will recompress both the
respective crew cabin, for which the switching device has
been actuated, and the companion outer chamber. Should the
two interconnecting doors between the forward and aft crew
cabins be opened or unsealed, both crew cabins will recompress simultaneously. Should the forward cabin recompres-

7

6

sion system be activated, the outer aft chamber vacuum remains, sealing the rear-most (main entrance-egress) doors of
the Life Support Systems Evaluator. To open these rear-most
doors, the aft emergency recompression valves must be actuated by the operator.
The rapid recompression system will function in any of
the following four modes of operation:
1) When the control panel POWER is ON and the key
switch is in the AUTOMATIC position, a signal from a U /V
detector will initiate automatic recompression for the
crew cabin and companion outer chamber corresponding to
the location of the U/V detector actuated.
2) When the electrical recompression switches located
in the forward and aft crew cabin emergency recompression panels are actuated. Again the cabin and outer
chamber recompressed is selective.
3) When the electrical recompression switches located
on the monitor's cabin emergency recompression panel,
located in the bottom section of the emergency control
console, are actuated. Again the cabin and outer
chamber recompressed is selective.
4) When the pneumatic emergency recompression valves
are switched OPEN (up). These valves are located under
a cover guard on the emergency pneumatic recompression
control panel mounted on the south wall of the control
room (Figure 3). Again the cabin and outer chamber
recompressed is selective.
Selective recompression of any singular crew cabin or
outer chamber, with a controlled rate-of-descent, may be
accomplished by an existing chain and sprocket hand operated
system of valves mounted on the south wall of the control
room.
Rapid recompression of either the forwar'a or aft crew
cabin may be accomplished as described above, provided that:
1) The chain and sprocket hand operated valves are
closed prior to using either the pneumatic or electrical
methods of activation.

8

Figure 3
Control Room And Life Support Systems Evaluator

9

i

2) The two interconnecting doors between the forward
and aft crew cabins are closed, secured, and sealed by
inflation.
3) The pneumatic emergency recompression valves have
been set in the OFF (neutral) position.
4) The main pneumatic gas Lottle supply is on-stream
and the bottle pressure maintained at, or above, 500
psig. This is to be reduced to a nominal pressure of
90 psig for system operation; a monitor gage is installed on the emergency pneumatic recompression control panel.
Rapid Recompression
When switched electrically, a 0-5 second delay timer
relay provides delay in actuation of the pneumatic operated
valves of up to 5 seconds. However, all audio and visual
alarms are immedia}e; this was done to notify the crew members and chamber operators of impending automatic recompression.
When switched either pneumatically or electrically,
the system will also close three separate gas manifold gas
shut-off valves as described earlier under , Actuation.
Audio and visual alarms at respective crew cabin manual electrical switch stations are activated regardless of
how, or from where, the rapid recompression system is activated. Other alarms are located as subsequently described
under ALARM SYSTEM.
In the event of a total power failure, recompression
may be accomplished by actuation of either the pneumatic
emergency recompression valves or the chain and sprocket
hand valves.
Exhaust Manifold valve
A valve has been installed in the exhaust manifold
which can be closed to prevent blow-back of vacuum pump oil
contaminated air into the oxygen enriched atmosphere of the

10

forward and aft crew cabins. The valve is pneumatically
operated and electrically controlled from the monitor's
cabin emergency recompression panel in the emergency control
console. Visual signals consist of a green light indicating
that the valve is in the normally open position and a red
light indicating the valve is closed during recompression.

MA14UAL ACTUATION
Manual actuation of the fii suppression system may be
initiated from inside or outside the Life Su p port Systems
Evaluator either electrically or hydraul-ically.
Manual electric control is provided by six switches.
A switch for each section of the evaluator is located on
control panel 91012-0, two switches are located in the forward crew cabin, easily accessible to the pilot and copilot, and the two switches are located at either end of the
aft crew cabin. These switches are provided with safety
guards and are sealed with frangible wire to prevent accidental actuation.
When the extinguishing system is actuated by operation
of the MANUAL ELECTRIC switches, it will cycle 20 seconds on
and 5 seconds off until:

o ELECTRIC POWER IS DISCONNECTED AT THE CONTROL PANEL.
It will complete the 20 second cycle, if in operation
at ;he time of power interruption.

o THE ACTIVATED SWITCH TS R."TURNED TO ITS NORMAL
POSITION.
o THE SYSTEM WATER SUPPLY IS EXHAUSTED.
Manual hydraulic control is provided by six hand operated valves conveniently located within the system. Their
function is to provide protection in the event of complete
electrical power loss. Two of these valves, enclosed in
protective boxes and appropriately labeled, are located on
the south wall of the control room. The two valves in the
forward crew cabin are located just above the pilot and copilot positions. The two valves in the aft crew cabin are
located near the doors at either end.
The hand operated valves are lever action type for fast
actuation and located in positions where they will not be

11

accidently operated. To further guard against inadvertent
operation they are safety sealed with frangible wire.
When a hand operated valve actuates the system, no
cycling takes place and water will continue to flow until:
o THE ACTUATED VALVE IS RETURNED TO ITS ORIGINAL
POSITION.
o THE MAIN SYSTEM VALVE IS CLOSED.
o THE WATER SUPPLY :S EXHAUSTED.
EXTINGUISHMENT
Spray Nozzles and Piping
The spray nozzles in this system provide a density of
7.5 gallons per minute per square foot of floor space. The
floor space is defined as the greatest cross sectional area
of the Life Support Systems Evaluator.
The nozzles are located to provide complete coverage
and correct distribution of water spray throughout the Life
Support Systems Evaluator. The aft crew cabin is approximately 20 feet long by 7.5 f eet diameter, requiring a total
flow of 1125 gallons per minute, provided by 38 spray nozzles.
The forward crew cabin is approximately 10 feet long taper-ing irregularly from 7.5 feet diameter to 3 feet diameter,
requiring a total flow of 563 gallons per minute provided by
19 spray nozzles, including 2 nozzles located beneath the
existing floor.
The piping is sufficiently large to give water flows
that meet or exceed the specifications and at the same time
occupy a minimum amount of space.
Nozzle Control Valves
The nozzle control valve provided for this system operates when a difference in water pressure occurs across the
valve. When the water supply pressure is equal to the control line pressure, the valve is held closed. Release of
control line pressure causes the valve to open, thereby
directing the supply line water to the close-coupled nozzles.

12

The type of water control used in this system provides
the following benefits:
o The system is wet to within inches of the spray
nozzle.
o 'ihe pressure release for the control side of the
system is immediate.
• The release valves for control water pressure can
be placed at remote locations of the control pressure
line, outside as well as inside the Life Support
Systems Evaluator.
• Electric wiring for the extinguishing portion of the
system is not required inside the Life Support Systems
Evaluator since the release is hydraulic.
Water System Features
Automatic cycling is accomplished when two external,
parallel mounted "auto dump" solenoid valves are triggered to
open, thus releasing control line pressure. Main water pressure then opens the hydraulic control valves and discharge
occurs. To stop discharge from the spray nozzles the "auto
dump" solenoid valves are closed and an "auto fill" solenoid
valve opened. This builds up control line pressure to the point
where the nozzle control valve is closed. The "auto fill"
solenoid valves are normally maintained in the open (deenergized) position and are closed (energized when the "auto dump"
valves are powered to open. Response time is approximately
100 milliseconds to open and 700 to 900 milliseconds to close.
Respective control line pressure and companion main
water line pressure are monitored by a pressure differential
switch calibrated to indicate via a control system pressure
warning light on the respective crew cabin water system supervisory panel, when the pressure in the control line drops
4 psi below the supply line pressure.
A second pair of pressure switches on
are set to :lose at pressures above 85 psi
sures below 85 psi. One switch is used on
to the forward crew cabin and the other on
to the aft crew cabin. They are connected
series pair is aiso connected in series wi
push butto;, on the chamber operator's main

13

the cont--1 line
and open at presthe control line
the control line
in series.
This
th the emerg ency
console and the

I

automatic, controls of the emergency control console. In
the event that the control line pressure of either section
of the Life Support Systems Evaluator drops below 85 psi
all electrical power will he disconnected from the Evaluator
and the emergency lights will be switched on. This action
will occur even though there is no power available at the
emergency control console. These pressure switches do not
have panel warning lights.
Control system piping is one-half inch galvanized
steel pipe. An air_ bleed valve is located at the highestpoint of the control line piping in order that all air may
be bled from these lines. It is essential that water and
not air be in contact with each nozzle control valve.
EMERGENCY CONTROL CONSOLE

A central emergency control console is located i:n the
control room. Included on this console are three supervisory
panels and one control panel, for monitoring and controlling
the fire and smoke detection and extinguishing system. All
wiring between these control and supervisory panels and the
interior of the Life Support Systems Evaluator carries no
more than 28 vdc and is teflon insulated and enclosed in tefIon sleeving 0.01 inch thick.
Control Panel
The control panel, P/N 91012-0 operates on 24 vdc. In
the event of an external power failure, automatic switchin;
provides power from a 24 vdc emergency battery unit. Table I
lists the controls and indicators located on the control
p anel and describes their functions.
TABLE I
CONTROL PANEL SWITCHES AND INDICATORS

Function

Nomenclature	
POWER Switch	

An on-off switch that applies 24-28
vdc tc the panel.

LINE Fuse	

10 amp. Overvoltage protection for
the ac portion or the circuit and by
an integral light indicates that power
is on.

14

TABLE I. CONTROL PANEL SWITCHES
AND INDICATORS (Cont'd)
Nomenclature

	

BATTERY Fuse	

Function
10 amp. Overvoltage protection for
circuit and by az integral light

indicates that ;?-c; power is available to the emergency control console.
SYSTEM OPERA-	
A key-type selector switch by which
TIONAL MODE Switch one of three modes of operation are
selected and locked in.
SEQUENCE TEST	
Switch	

A momentary 2-position switch used
to check operation of timer cycle.

MANUAL ELECTRIC	
Switch	

Two guarded switches used in the event
of fire. Permits manual-electric
actuation of the excinguishing system
in the Life Support Systems Evaluator
cabin indicated by their labels.

SILENCE HORN	
Button	

A push button switch that silences
building alarm and control panel audio
alarm.

RESET Button	

A push button for resetting smoke detectors after system }ias been actuated.

SYSTEM INOPERATIVE Indicates when pressure is incorrect,
*Indicator Light	
a valve is in wrong position, etc.
System inoperative audio alarm wi?.1
sound at same time light goes on.
SEQUENCE TEST	
*Indicator Light	

Indicates that timer is operating when
SEQUENCE TEST switch is activated.
Stays on for 20 seconds and off for 5
seconds as long as switch is held in
position.

FIRE CHAMBER	
*Indicator Light	

Indicates that aft crew cabin system
is ac^ivated or is tieing tested when
SEQUENCE TEST switch is ..n CHAMFER

position.

15

TABLE I. CONTROL PANEL SWITCHES
AND TNnTr AMnnr (^Gli ' u;
Ncmenclature	

Function

FIRE FORWARD CABIN Indicates that forward crew cabin
*Indicator Light	
system is activated or is being tested when SEQUENCE TEST switch is in
FORWARD CABIN position.
WATER VALVE	
*Indicator Light	

Indicates when any valve in system is
not in an operative position. Buzzer
will sound simultaneously when light
is switched on.

WATER PRESSURE	

Indicates when water pressure in either control or supply lines is below
preset values. Buzzer will sound simultaneously when light is switched on.

*Indicator lights are the push-to-test type.
The three modes of fire detection operation selected by
the SYSTEM OPERATIONAL MODE selector switch are AUTOMA'T`IC,
MANUAL HYDRAULIC AND MANUAL ELECTRIC. In. the AUTOMATIC mode
the system s activated ,open receipt of a signal from the U/V
Detector. While in this mode it may be actuated by either the
MANUAL ELECTRIC or MANUAL HYDRAULIC methods. When the selector
switch is in the MANUAL ELECTRIC position the detectors will
actuate the alarms but not the extinguishing system. The
extinguishing system must be activated either by the two
switches or the control pane' or by the four switches inside
the Life Support Systems Evaluator. When in this mode of
operation, the extinguishing system may also be activated by
operation of the manual hydraulic valves. When tcie selector
switch is in the MANUAL HYDRAULIC position the extinguishing
system alone, may he actuated by the two manual ball valves
located on the control room south wall or by the four ball
valves located within the Life Support Systems Evaluator.
Automatic pne v atic recompression of the respective crew cabin
and associated outer chamber occurs if in the automatic or
manual electric mode, but not when the manual h,, drau.i is mode
is activated.

16

Aft Crew Cabin Supervisory Panel
The aft crew cabin supervisory panel, P/N 910:1.3-0 opert co	 c
In the event of an external power failure,
2 1-.-dc	
automatic switching provides power from a 24 vdc emergency
battery unit. In addition to monitoring the water system of
the aft crew cabin, this panel also monitors the water supply
tank air pressure and tank water level. Table II lists the
indicators on this panel and describes their functijn. These
indicators are all dual light type and display a green light
when the system is normal and a red light when trouble occurs.
a

U

^•	

v

TABLE II
AFT CREW CABIN SUPERVISORY PANEL INDICATORS
Nomenclature	

Function

AIR PRESSURE	

Indicates the air pressure in water supply tank. If the pressure falls below
110 psi, the red light will be on.

TANK FULL	
WATER LEVEL	

Indicates water level in supply tank. If
supply falls below 1750 gailons, the red
light will be on.

SUPPLY VALVE	

Indicates position of main water supply
valve, V 1. Green light will be on when
valve is full open.

MAIN CHAMBER	
VALVE	

Indicates position of main chamber water
shut-off valve, V 2. Green light will be
on when valve is full open.

WATER SUPPLY	
PRESSURE	

Indicates pressure in main supply lines,
PS 1. Turns reel when pressure drops
below 100 psig.

CONTROL SYSTEM	
PRESSURE	

Indicates pressure differential between
control system line and main water supply
line, PS 2. Indicator light turns red
when control system line pressure drops
4.5 psi below main supply line pressure.

17

6

TABLE II. AFT CREW CABIN SUPERVISORY
PANEL INDICATORS (Cont'd)
Nomenclature

	

Fnnct-i nn

MANUAL INTERNAL Indicates position of manual internal
DUMP VALVES	
dump valves, the microswitches of
which are wired in series. Green light
indicates both valves are closed.
AUTOMATIC FILL	
VALVE	

Indicates position of automatic fill
valve, SV3. Green light indicates
valve is open.

MANUAL EXTERNAL Indicates position of manual external
DUMP VALVE	
dump valve, located similar to V5.
Green light indicates valve is closed.
AUTOMATIC DUMP	
VALVE	

Indicates position of parallel automatic dump valves, SV1 and SV2. Green
light indicates valves are closed.
NOTES:

Valve and switch designations and location discussed in
Section III - Arming the Sprinkler Water System.
If there is no light in a particular indicator when the
system power is on, cha.ige the bulbs in the affected
indicator to check for a burned out bulb.
Forward Crew Cabin Supervisory Panel
The forward crew cabin supervisory panel, P/N 91013-1,
operates on 24 vdc. In the event of an external power failure,
automatic switching provides power from a 24 vdc emergency
battery unit. This panel has the same indicators performing
the same functions as the aft crew cabin, panel, except that
there is no provision for monitoring the water supply tank.
See table II for the functions of the indicators which are the
same as those in aft crew cabin.

18

Detector Supervisory Panel
The detector supervisory panel, P/N 91014-0, operates on
24 vdc. In the event of external power failure, automatic
switching provides power from a 24 vdc emergency baLtery
unit. This panel shows the approximate locations of the
individual detectors and indicates by means of red lights
which detector(s) have been activated or are in a trouble
condition. When the detectors are activated, the indicator
lights cycle rapidly from red to green, thereby preventing
an operator from determining which U/V sensor has fired. He
may, however, determine which crew cabin has been activated
by the "FIRE CHAMBER" or "FIRE FORWARD CABIN" indicator light
indicating red on the control panel.
The U/V sensors for each crew cabin are wired in series,
on bot:i the +24 vdc and neutral 24 vdc sides of the power
circuits. In the event of a loss of the positive power leg
on, for example, U/V sensor 3, the detector supervisory panel
indicators for U/V sensor 1,2 and 3 will indicate red, the
automatic dump valve indicator on the aft cabin water system
supervisory panel will switch to red and thereby actuate the
panel buzzer horn, and light the system inoperative and water
valve indicators on the control panel. In the event of a
loss of the neutral leg on U/V sensor 3, the indicators for
all U/V sensors will remain green; however, the aft cabin
automatic dump valve indicator will switch to red with resultant reactions by the horn and indicators. Similar reactions
are initiated by the failure of a forward cabin U/V sensor
power leg via the forward cabin automatic dump valve indicator.
Neither failure mode will actually cause the automatic dump
valves to actuate. Circuit continuity may be checked by removing the system from service and checking continuity on
terminal boards D for the forward cabin sensors, on DD for the
aft cabin sensors, located behind the detector supervisory
panel. Should it be imperative to return, or retain, the system in service, power may be restored to the unaffected sensors (U/V 1 and 2 in our earlier example) by temporarily wiring
both sides of the sensors power circuits in parallel at D or
DD terminal boards.

19

Reaction Time
This system will confe-m to the requirements of the specification.:- in that initial water discharge shall commence in
less than 200 milliseconds for the U/V detector sequence and
less than 5.0 seconds after sufficient smoke enters the monitoring chamber for the smoke detector sequence, providing
that: system power is ON; the control panel operational mode
switch is in the AUTOMATIC position; and jumpers 62-63 and
64-65 are in.
PRESSURIZED WATER SYSTEM
The requirement of 7.5 gpm per square foot of arbitrary
floor area in both the forward and aft crew cabins of the Life
Support Systems Evaluator could not be achieved by an existing water service. A pressurized water system was designed
to provide a flow of 565 gallons, assuming simultaneous flow
of water in both crew cabins, for each of the three (3) 20
second extinguishing cycles. This :system will provide a water
flow at a spray nozzle pressure no :Less than 45 psi thus providing effective spray area coverage and penetration in both
crew cabins simultaneously.
The system consists of a 2000 gallon ASME approved
pressurized tank, fabricated by Massachusetts Engineering Co.,
Inc., of North Quincy, Mass., in accordance with FH/RAD drawing F5392-1/WPiJLi"5, sheet ME4. This tank was built to NFPA
requirements and certified for 145 psi working pressure. The
pressurizing system consists of a 2100 psi manifold and provisions for fourteen 2100 psi compressed air bottles. The
2100 psi manifold pressure is reduced to 100 psi by two (2)
dome regulators. These Grove Valve & Regulator Corp. dome
regulators are operated in parallel to provide an additional
safety factor. Should one fail, the other regulator can carry
the full load. The pressurized tank is prevented from over
pressure by a safety valve set at 135 psi. This Grove Valve
& Regulator Corp safety valve has Deen sizE, d to vent the full
output of the manifold without damage to the tank. The tank
will be filled from a 2 inch domestic water fill line. Foreign
material w.i' be strained out by a 2 inch strain-r in this line.
Watef Level Indicator
The correct level of water in the tank i:3 indicated by a
Contrclotron Corporation liquid level sensor Model 210L. With

20

6

the proper level of water in the tank, this device illuminates a green light on a panel at the base of the tank. Should
the water drop below the required level due to leakage or useage, the green light will go out. This water level signal is
also repeated on the aft crew cabin supervisory panel as the
TANK FULL WATER LEVEL indicator and attendant alarm. There is
also a Controlotron liquid level sensor mounted in the base of
the tank to indicate when the water supply is exhausted. Thus,
with water in the tank, a green light on this liquid level sensor will be illuminated. If for any reason all the water in
the tank is drawn off, a red light will appear on this sensor.
POWER SUPPLIES
Primary Rectifier Unit
The primary electrical supply for all systems is 24 vdc.
For normal operations, 15 amp, 24 vdc is supplied by
Lightalarm Corporation rectifier unit, Model 4027-J, operating
from the 110 vac building service.
Emergency Battery Unit
In the event of failure of the 110 vac supply, the
load will be automatically transferred to a 24-vdc emergency
battery unit. This "Lightalarm" battery unit, which utilizes
Cadmium cells, Catalogue.number H1P6-NIFE, will supply 18 amps
for a period of 60 minutes. The bat­ t.ery system has its own
solid-state, dual rate 110 vac input charger, all mounted
in a wall cabinet. This charger will put the batteries on high
charge in event of a power interruption and automatically switch
to trickle charge when the batteries reach full charge. The
high charge mode is also used, if the battery charge cannot he
sufficiently maintained by the trickle charge and voltage has
dropped below 18 vdc.
ALARM SYSTEM
The remote Building Alarm system will be actuated by the
alarm circuit in the emergency control console. This system
will sound audio alarms in the following locations:

7y

6

o In the corridor adjacent to Room 109.
o In '_he High Bay Area adjacent to the Life Support
Systems Evaluator

o In the forward and aft crew cabins.
o In the Vibration and Impact Branch High Bay Area.
In addition, a red visual signal in the Vibration
and Impact Area will supplement the audio alarm.
o On the emergency pneumatic recompression control
panel.
The activated alarm system will indicate one of the following conditions:
Fire detection and extinguishing system
o UV detectors operating in forward or aft crew
cabins.
o Smoke detector operating in either forward or
aft crew cabin.
o MANUAL ELECTRIC actuation in the forward or aft

crew cabin and/or the emergency control console.
Rapid recompression system
o Automatic recom p ression as initiated at the
emergency control console.
o Electrical recompression initiated at the
switches located in the forward and aft crew
cabins.
o Pneumatic recompression initiated at the emergency pneumatic recompression control panel.

22

SECTION III
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
SAFETY
The sole function of the fire detection-extinguishment
and recompression systems is to provide positive protection
for personnel in the Life Support Systems Evaluator. Extreme
care and consideration has been taken to preclude the possibility of inadvertant actuation. The system has been carefully e,igineered to provide reliability and minimum probability of inadvertent recompression and/or water spray actuation.
They are constructe,'. to provide a minimum source of ignition
within the Life Support Systems Evaluator.
The following precautions are recommended to be followed
during operation. The doors between the sections of the Life
Support Systems Evaluator should be closed even though the
two sections are at the same simulated altitude. This would
prevent the actuation of an ultraviolet detector in one section from flame or arcing occurring in the other section, as
well as provide better recompression control. Provision
should be made to equalize internal and external pressures as
quic;^ly as possible consistent with human tolerances. Normal
electric power to the Life Support Systems Evaluator is disrupted should the system be actuated while the fire detection
system key switch is in th; MANUAL HYDRAULIC position. During Life Support Systems Evaluator down time, the fire detection SYSTEM OPERATIONAL MODE switch should be locked in the
MANUAL ELECTRIC MODE to prevent actuation due to welding or
smoking.
Possible causes of inadvertent water spray actuation
have been foreseen and the following actions taken to forestall them:
Moisture in the air sample being monitored by th,^ smc::e
detector is prevented from triggering the system by removing
the smoke detectors from the circuit after the first actuation.
In the event of the loss of supply water pressur^ during
a test program, a trouble alarm will be sounded. The control
personnel may then make the necessary decisions relative to
the continuation of the test in progress.

23

0

Every effort has been made to make the control pressure
piping as leak tight and damage proof as possible. Galvanized steel piping has been used instead of copper tubing to
prevent damage to the control lines from causing actuation.
A small orifice in the control line feeds directly from the
supply line, thus preventing actuation from small pressure
drops.
In the event of building power loss, uninterrupted detection and extinguishment has been provided? for through the
use of a 24 vdc emergency hattery unit. Further provision
for system integrity is made by having no electrical equipment located inside the Life Support Systems Evaluator for
the wet portion of the protection system.
Because of the possibility of fire during periods of
Life Support Systems Evaluator shutdown, provision has been
made so 'Chat the detectors may be left on. With the SYSTEM
OPERATIONAL MODE switch in the MANUAL ELECTRIC mode, the detectors will sound the alarm but will not activate the extinguishing system.
The ultraviolet sensors are designed to be solar blind
and are not susceptible to operation under most conditions
of ambient light. This would include flashlights, flashbulbs,
etc. They will, however, react to quartz iodide lamps, since
these devices einit radiation within 1900 to 2900 angstrom
level. S i.nce all ultraviolet sensors are treated with antistat film over the quartz bulb, the units will not operate
accidentally due to the influence of static electricity.
The protectior systems have been designed from a "human
factors" standpoint. The follow'ng precautions have been
taken:
A key switch has been provided in the fire detection

system so that automatic detection equipment may be locked
out when not in operation.
switch guards are used with level toggle switches to
preclude accidental tripping of release mechanisms.
Manua switches and valves have been located to provide
for prompt actuation without being exposed to inadvertent
operation or damage.

24

All sensors and valves are monitored for their integrity and ability to deal with an emergency condition.
The use of dual lights has been incorporated in the
system design and they are color coded to indicate a "safe"
or "trouble" condition.
ELECTRICAL ELEMENTS

The probability of short circuits has been minimised
through the us% of teflon insulated wire within the Life
Support Systems Evaluator. All wiring used has been "derated" a minimum of 50 percent of the normal insulation
resistance and current carrying characteristics.
Provision has been made, within the control panel, to
effectively suppress transient voltage fiuctuatinns within
the control circuits of the system.
WATER CONTROL
It is possible that the cycling of one system could
provide significant water pressure changes in the main water
supply piping. To prevent such a surge from one system tripping another, check valves have been installed below each
system main control valve and the control piping connection.
To guard against failure of the critical solenoids in
the hydraulic control circuit, the "dump solenoids" have
been duplicated.
To guard against possible malfunction of the pneumatic
dome regulators supplying reduced air pressure to the water
system, two of these regulators have been installed in parallel. Should one malfunction the other is adequate to
maintain system flow during actuation of the extinguishment
components.
NOTE
During shutdown, the water supply valve, V1,
should be opened about two turns and the control line charging valve, V3, should be opened.
However, when the system is operational, the
control line charging valve, V3; MUST BE CLOSED.

25

0

ARMING TIIE SPRINKLER WATER SYSTEM (Figure 4)
As the water to tle forward and aft crew cabin nozzles
is hydraulically released due to a differential pressure
occurring across tho sprinkler valve, it is of the utmost
importance that the following sequence of operations be
strictly follcwed to prevent floodin g of the Life Support
_
Systems Evaluator.
1)

Close valves V1 through V9 and apply 10 psi
gage to the water tank.

2)

All manual hydraulic valves must be closed.

3 1 Open V1, V7, and V9.
4)

Slowly open V3 unties all the entrapped air is
bled from the system and only water flows from
V9. Close V9.

5)

Slowly open V5 until all the entrapped air is
bled from the system and only water flows from
V5. Close V5.

6)

Open V2 and V6.
Slowly open V8 until all the entrapped air is
bled from the system and only water flows from
V8. Close V8.

8)

Increase tank pressure slowly until the entire
system is at 100 psig as indicated on gages
G1 and G2. Pressure on G1 should never exceed
the pressure on G2 or the system will actuate.

9)

Close V3. The water system is now "armed" and
ready to deal with a fire.

Whenever the control line pressure indicated by G2 falls
25 percent below the supply line pressure as indicated on Gl,
the system will hydraulically "dump."
Pressure switch PSI will sound a low pressure alarm whenever the system water supply pressure falls below 100 psiq.

26

TO GARIN N0771 F s

N IUD cni G*NOIDS

TO GA61N
MANUAL

NYDRAULIG
SV3
RIFIGE

TO OVATE R
)UPPL TANS(

V4^^
V1 Supply Valve
V2 Shut Offf Valve
V3 Control Line Charging Valve
V4 Drain Valve
VS Air Vent Valve
V6 Pressure Switch Isolation Valve
V7 Pressure Switch Isolation Valve

PSI Supply Line Low Pressure Switch
PS2 Control System Differential Pressure Switch
PS4 Pressure Switch for LS SE Elect-ical Power
Shut Off
CV1 Check Valve
CV2 Check Valve

V8 Drain Valve
V9 Drain Valve

SVl Automatic Dump Valve
SV2 Automatic Dump Valve
SV3 Automatic Fill Valve
Fig> > re 4

Control Elements For Water Distribution System

27

PS2 is a differential pressure switch which will sound an
alarm in the control console whenever the pressure, as read
on G1, exceeds the pressure, as read on G2, by 4.5 psig.
The water pressurizing system on the main manifold should
be kept above or at 1800 psi. Whenever the pressure falls below this point, the fourteen 2000 psi bottles on the manifold
should be replaced.
The pressure flask on the safety relief valve should be
periodically checked and recharged when necessary.
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE
The various components of the Fire Detection and Extinguishment System are constantly monitored by the ccntrol
and supervisory panels. Therefore, maintenance is kept to
a minimum. Only those com p onents that indicate trouble
through the control panel will require attention.
Periodic Check
The flare and smoke detectors should be checked for operation periodically. Between 6 to 9 months is the suggested
period; however, this can be adjusted in the light of experi_encc with the system. The system integrity should be checked
prior to the start of a prolonged research program.
Check the ultraviolet
:" p ERATIONAL MGDE switch in
will prevent the detectors
system, but will allow them

detectors by placing the SYSTEM
the MANUAL ELECTRIC position. This
from actuating the extinguishing
to sig-zal an alarm.
NOS"E

NO`T'IFY ALL PERSONNEL CONCERNED
THAT A TEST IS BEING CONDUCTED.
Check operation rf each flame detector in turn, masking
t'.:, others. Use a match, candle, or pocket lighten as a flame
source and hold it appr_oxima`.ely one foot from the detector
under test. As soon as the alarm triggers, silence it by depressing the SILENCE HORN button on the control panel.

28

0

Check each smoke detector by placing the SYSTEM OPERATIONAL MODE switch in the MANUAL ELECTRIC position as before. Use a piece of punk cr the smoke from a cigarette
and allow it to enter the monitoring chamber of the smoke
detector under test. The detector must trigger an alarm
within 5.0 seconds. Silence the horn as above.
If either type of detector fails to trigger an alarm
or the smoke detector takes over 5 seconds to alarm after

smoke enters the monitoring chamber, remove and replace the
detector.

NOTE
WHEN TESTS HAVE BEEN CONCLUDED,
NOTIFY ALL PERSONNEL CONCERNED.
Cleaning
Clean the U/V detector using a clean dry cloth and
wiping l ightly. Make certain that the control panel POWER
switch is in OFF position before cleaning. A special antistat^c spray has been applied to the U/V detector globes.
No additional spray should be used without prior approval.
The smoke detectors require no cleaning. However, after an
extinguishing system actuation, they must be thoroughly
dried. Refer to drawing 32-90017--3.
After actuation of tha extinguishers, dry the smoke
detectors as follows: Remove the detector from its installed position; remove protective shroud and dry it using
a soft absorbent cloth: blow out the detector sensing chamber using dry, clean, filtered air at low pressure, 15-25
psig; and place unit in oven controlled at 90 to 95 F for
2 hours.

29

6

SECTION IV
SPARE PARTS AND DRAWINGS
SPARE PARTS LIST
It is recommended that the following spare parts be kept
on hanC in the quantities indicated.
RAPT TTn

9001A-2
06-115002-001
06-114983-001
06-139316-001
06-139243-001
06-139244-001
06-115028-000
90017-3
06-139283-000
06 114977-005
114121-4
114121-3
06-115016-001
06-114976-001
06-114976-002
114280
06-114994-001
9705

NOMENCLATURE	
Ultraviolet Detector
Globe for U/V Detector
U/V Tube
U/V Tube Gasket
Lower Gasket
Upper Gasket
PC Board	 (Smoke Detector)
Smoke Detector
Cover	 (Smoke Detector)
Fuse, Control Panel
Line Fuseholder & Lamp
Battery Fuseholder & Lamp
Lamp,	 Incandescent	 (Push to test)
Lamp,	 Incandescent,	 2 -pin Red
Lamp, Incandescent, 2 -pin Green
Relay-,	 4 pole,	 24 vdc
Relay,	 6 pole,	 24 vdc
Switch, Pressure	 (PS1),	 Type J7

QUANTITY
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
6

2
2
6
12

12
4
1
1

(United Electric)

9544
(United Electric)
8210C3 (ASCO)

82101312 (ASCO)

Switch, Pressure (PS2), Type J21K	

1

Valve, Solenoid, 24 vdc (SV1 	 & SV2) 1
Valve, Solenoid, 24 vdc (SV3)
1

30

R

DRAWING LIST
The drawings listed below cover the installation,at
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio.
DRAWING NUMBER
F5392, Sh. #1
F5392, Sh. Ll
F5392, Sh. L2
F5392, Sh. M1
F5392, Sh. M2
F5392, Sh. M3
F5392, Sh. ME1
F5392, Sh. ME2
F5392, Sh. ME3
F5392, Sh. ME4
F5392, Sh. ME5
F5392, Sh. P1
90017-3
06-139291 -OUX
9001.6-2
32-002
32-003
32-004
32-005
32-006
32-007
32-009
57
57,	 Sh.
57,	 Sh.
57,	 Sh.

#1
#2
#3

TITLE
Life Support Systems Evaluator Chamber
--List of Drawings
Layout - Life Support Systems Evaluator
& Ndjacent Area
Layout - Life Support Systems Evaluator
Modification of Existing 3" Air-Vacuum Lines
Addition of 3" & 6" Pneumatic Air-Vacuum Valves
Pneumatic Recompression Control Panel Piping
Mechanical & Electrical Misc. Diagrams
Panel Arrangements & Name Plates
Panel Arrangements & Name Plates
Fog System Pressurized Tank
Fog System Pressure Tank-Level Indication
Recompression System
Smoke Detector
Circuit Board Smoke Detector
iI/V Detector
Schematic of Control Panel-Fire Detection
Schematic Forward Crew Cabin Water
System Supervisory Panel
Schematic, Detector Supervisory Panel
Interconnection Wiring Diagram for Life
Support Systems Evaluator
Schematic - U/V Detector
Schematic - Aft Crew Cabin Water
System Supervisory Panel
Schematic - Audib._e "Inoperative" Alarm
Water Supply System - Valve Location Legend
Sprinkler Piping
Sprinkler Piping
Sprinkler Piping

31

