A FUNDAMENTAL

STUDY

OF SMOLDERING

COMBUSTION

MICROGRAVITY

IN

N93-20208

Carlos Fernandez-Pello, Principal Investigator
Patrick J. Pagni, Co-Principal Investigator
Department of Mechanlcal Engineering
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720

ABSTRACT
A research program is being conducted to study smoldcring combustion
in microgravity.
The program's
linal objective is to design and conduct smolder cx_riments
in a space based laboratory,
which will complement normal gravity ones, and that will help to: increase the current fundamental
understanding
of
smoldering;
predict smolder behavior in a space-based
installation; and prevent and control smolder originated, ground or space based, lircs.
I. INTRODUCTION
Smoldering is delined as a non-flaming,
surface combustion
reaction, that propagates through the interior
of porous combustible
materials. The propagation
of the smolder reaction is a complex
phenomena
involving processes related to the transport of heat and mass in a porous media, together with surface
chemical reactions. Smoldering is a weakly reacting phenomena, and generally
propagates
very slowly.
The products of smoldering combustion
are, however, often toxic and consequently
hazardous. Smoldering can also play an important role in the initiation of unwanted lires because of the potential rapid transition from the slow smoldering reaction to the flaming combustion of the material. Furthermore,
smoldering is often difficult to detect and suppress because it may take place in the material
interior and the
porosity of the material may prevent the access of the extinguishing
agent to the reaction zone. Thus,
understanding
of the physical and chemical
mechanisms
controlling smoldering
is important not only
because smoldering is a fundamental combustion
process, but because such understanding
can be critical
to the prevention and control of unwanted fires.
Gravity influences smoldering by affecting the transport controlling propagation
mechanisms,
the stability of the propagation front, the structure of the porous material and the flow of particulates
through the
material. Conducting smolder experiments
in microgravity
will simplify the study of the phenomena
by
eliminating some of these effects. Furthermore,
to datc there is no experimental
information
about smoldering behavior in microgravity.
This is important since such information
and complementary
theoretical

251

foundatior_
arenecessary
toasses
thefire riskof aspace
based
installation.
Theproject'soverallobjective theunderstanding
is
andprediction smolderingombustion
of
c
undernormalandmicrogravity
conditions. is accomplished by conducting smolder experiments on the ground
This
and in a space based laboratory,
II. RESEARCH
II.1

Normal

and developing

theoretical

models of thc process.

PROGRESS

Gravity

Smoldering:

A series of experiments
of forced flow smoldcring, opposed and forward, have bcen conducted. In addition to providing information about smoldering,
the experiments
have the objective of determining
the
effect of buoyancy in the smolder process. This is accomplished
by comparing
the experimental
results
for upward and downward smoldering,
and by' comparing
the data with the predictions
of theoretical
models of the process. Measurements
conducted in these experiments
included the smolder propagation
velocity and the reaction zone temperature as a function of some of the parameters that affect them. The
data are correlated with non-dimensional
parameters
that are derived from a theoretical
analysis of the
problem.

"

The experimental
apparatus consists of a square cross sccti0n duct containing
the fuci and through
which /fie oxidizer gas flows to produce a one-dimensional,
forced flo,,v_ sm0[d-c/, and the supporting
instrumentatidn_
The test section containint_ the porous fucl conslsts'of a 0.3 m=long Vcrtica] d'UCt:with a
0.15 m side square cross section..Xletercd
air flows into the test section {iqr0u£zh _ diffuscK_d
) 50 mm
iong settfing SeCtion liilcd=with glass beads. All the tests arc conducted wiih ]:_._0mmside cu_s°0f
open
cell, unretarded, white flexible polyurethane
foam. The rate of smolder propagation
is obtained from the
temperature
histories of eight Chromel-Alumel
thermocouples
0.8 mm in diameter that are em_dded
at
predetermined
positions in the porous fuel with their junction placed in the fuel centerline. The smolder
velocity is calculated from the time lapse of the reaction zone arrival to two consecutive
thermocouples,
and the known distance between the thcrmocouplcs.
These thcrmocouples
arc also used to measure the
rcacfi0n/,one
temperature which is characicrizcd
by a maximum in the temperature proliic. : ::

....... A.I1 the experiments
showed that three zones With distinct smolder characteristics
Canbc identified along
" liae foam sample. An initial zone near the igniter where the smolder process is inlluenccd by heat from the
ighi[cr, an intermediate
zone _here smolder is relatively free from external effects, and a third zone near
the sample end that is strongly affected by' the external environment.
The smolder reaction propagation
" velocityand
temperature
generally have a direct corrcsp0ndcncc
and wiry {n each one of thcsc three
zon(/s.
....
Opposed
Smolder:
Characteristics
results of opposed smolder are presented in Fig. 1, which shows the
variation of the downward smolder propagation velocity through the sample length for several representative opposed air flow velocities. Tests were also conducted at other llow velocities, bu_t_thc results are not
..... pmsented:i.o
axkild_crowdlng=of
thc:i{gure. The data_is {he average from ijV_ ]_s[_;_n:d:thcTerror
bars
_d_cscfibe the maxim_urn dcv{a!ones from 0ae mean. Tlicsc datit pius 0{her _bt_inedwlm=
different foam
lengths, initial temperature and orientation are con-elated in Fig. 2 in terms of a non-dimensional
smolder
velocity that is derived, from a theoretical analysis of the problem previously, developed Undertiiis grant.
The analysis_s{chiiy
bahmces the energy needed to heal the foam to the smoldei temperature
and the
energy generated by the smolder reaction, which is assumed to be in thermodynamic
equilibrium.
By
assuming that all the oxygen is consumed at the reaction zone (smolder is oxygen limited), the analysis
predicts that the smolder velocity is proportional
to the mass flux of oxygen at the reaction zone. The
mass flux of oxidizer to the reaction zone is obtained in its turn from an ana.lysis of the mixed, forced and
free, flow through the porous fuel. From the correlation of Fig. 2 it is seen that the model predicts well the
measurementsl
except at conditions were extinction or transition to tlaming occur. In these limiting conditions solid or gas chemical kinetics play an important role, and the smolder velocity is no longer singly
controlled
by the oxidizer mass flux. An interesting result of correlating the experimental
data with the
252

modelprcdictionis thatthe effectof buoyancy anbe extracted simplycomparing pureforced
c
by
the
flowandmixedflowcorrelations.
Suchcomparisonhows
s
thatbuoyancy
hasaninfluence
overthehole
range velocities
of
tcsted.
These results point out to a smolder process that is controlled
by the competition
between the supply of
oxidizer to the reaction zone and the loss of heat from the reaction zone. For example analyzing the data
in zone II of Fig. 1, it is seen that at very low flow velocities ( < 0.5 mm/s) the smolder propagation velocity is very small, indicating
the presence of a weak smolder reaction. As the air flow velocity is
increased, the smolder reaction velocity first in-crease, reaches a maximum (at approximately
2.5 ram/s),
and then start to decrease. The initial increase in the smolder temperature
and velocity is due to the
increased supply of oxidizer to the reaction zone which enhances the heat production, as predicted by the
model. As the air velocity is increased further, the heat generated at the reaction and the convective
heat
losses eventually
balance each other and the smolder reaction velocity reaches a maximum. If the air flow
rate is increased even further the heat losses overcome the heat generation and the smolder temperature
and velocity start to decrease. For air Ilow rates larger than 2.8 ram/s, the heat losses dominate and cause
the weakening and final extinction of the smoldcr reaction. The above discussed controlling mechanisms
also apply to the other two zones, although the cxtcrnal effects modify somewhat the balance between
them.
Forward
Smoldering:
The measurements
show that in this type of smolder, as the flow velocity is
increased the smolder velocity increases but the reaction temperature decreases, rcgardlcss of the sample
location. These trends are the result of the hot post-combustion
gases being convected
ahead of the
smolder front. Although they preheat the virgin material downstream
of the reaction favoring the propagation of the smolder reaction, they also dilute the oxidizer ahead of the reaction weakening it and reducing its tempcralurc.
The smolder velocity data are also corrclatcd well with the predictions of a theoretical model of this mode of smolder. For upward smoldering,
transition to flaming was observed to occur in
the char at the zone closer to the sample end and lot air velocities of 15 ram/see or larger. Comparison
between upward and downward smoldering also showed that the effect of gravity takes place for air flow
rates smaller than 3 mm/scc.
Transition
to Flaming:
Experiments are currently being conducted to study smoldering in the presence
of a gas/solid interface, and the phenomenon of the transition to Ilaming. The experiments
are conducted
in a test facility that includes _ small ycalc combustion tunnel and the supporting instrumentation.
The
tunnel test scction is 0.61m long with a cross section 0.15m wide and [].07m deep, and is vertically
oriented. Prc-mctered
compressed air [lows through a settling chamber and a converging nozzle prior to
entering the test section. Foam samples with a 0.15m side square cross section and with variable lengths
are mounted flush in one of the test section wails. A Ilat type igniter is mounted in the upstream end of the
fuel sample. The experiments
show that transition to Ilaming is very sensitive to sample size, probably
because of heat losses to the surrounding ambient. Samples with lengths smaller than 0.15m showed a
smolder reaction that would propagate upward at an increased velocity, and that would became hotter and
produce considerable
amounts of smoke, but that eventually would extinguish iLsclf apparcndy because of
the dilution of the available oxidizer by the post-combustion
gascs. For samples larger than 0.15 m and at
relatively low flow velocities (,of the order of 0.3 m/s), transition to Ilaming is consistently observed initially in the upper part of the foam near the interface, after which the whole sample is rapidly involved in
Ilames and bums completely.
A parametric study is currently being conductcd to study the mechanisms
controlling the transition to flaming.
II.2

(;round

Based

Microgravity

Smoldering:

A series of smolder experiments
were conducted at the NASA LeRC 2.2 seconds drop tower to observe
trends in the ignition characteristics
of the foam, and to attempt to infer how smoldering will behave in
microgravity.
The parameter analyzed was the time derivative
of the smolder reaction temperature,
because the temperature
itself, or the smolder velocity, do not change enough in 2.2 seconds to observe
significant differences.
The temperature
gradients measured
in the loam ahead of the reaction zone
253

showed
thatmicrogravity
favors
theinitial heating thevirgin fuelby thesmolder
of
reaction,
andthatthe
upper
range flowvelocitiesatwhichbuoyancylaysasigniiicantroleon smoldering around
of
p
is
3mm/s,
in approximate
agreement thenormal ravityexperiments.
with
g
A seriesof opposed
flow, downward
andupward, moldering
s
experiments erealsoconducted a
w
in
NASAKC-135
aircraft(30 sof micro-gforupto 40parabolas) observe effects of the variation of
to
the
the gravity on the smolder process. The experimental
apparatus is a small scale version of that described
in the normal gravity forced ilow experiments.
Although the microgravity
period was too short to study
steady smoldering in micro-gravity,
the tests provided initial information
about the process and permitted
the observation of smolder trends as the gravity changes. The tests also complement
the Drop Tower tests
summarized above, As with those tests, the variation of the smolder reaction temperature
with time was
the parameter

used to infer the effect of gravity on the smolder

process.

A characteristic
example of the measurements
made is given in Fig. 3, where the variation with time of
the temperature in the three zones of the foam identified above (near igniter, middle, and free end) is plotled together with the gravity, level variation, The results show that buoyancy affects the temperature differently according to the location of the measurement with respect to the reaction zone. In the virgin foam
ahead of tile reaction zone and in the char behind of it. the temperature increases as the gravity is reduced,
but the opposite is observed
around the reaction zone. This indicates thai buoyancy, affects both the
species transport and transfer of heat to and from the reaction zone. At the reaction zone the former is
dominant, which results in a decrease of the smolder temperature
in microgravity.
Away from the reaction zone the latter is dominant and the temperature increases due to the lack of ConvectiVe cooling. All
these effects are less noticeable
as the llow velocity is increased, and as the reaction propagates toward
the sample
ends.

interior

conlirming

that buoyancy

is important

at low Ilow velocities

and near the sample

II.3 Space Based Experinient:
Work on this aspect of tile program has included the design of a small scale smolder
successfully carried out in the glovebox in Spacelab on USML-1, during tile June 25
sion of the Space Shuttle Columbiat. and the preparation of the Science Requ!!'emcnt
ceptual Design Review for a larger scale space based experiment to be conducted in
ol the gas-cans of the Space Shuttle in the mid-ninelics.

experiment that was
- July 11, 1992 misDocument and Con[he mid-deck or one

Tile gtovebox experiment
hardware consists of four modules each containing an instrumented
fuel sample, _ilh an embedded igniter and an internal fan to induce forced convection. The test variables of the
experiment
are the igniter geometry and the convective environment.
Through the use of ,an axial igniter
and a plate igniter, both rudial and axial smolder is investigated. For each igniter geometry, a test is conducted with a quiescent environmcnt
and with a low velocity flow, for a total of four test conditions. The
modules are sealed, lexan boxes, nominally 0.15m by 0.20m, filled with air. A cylinder of open-cell
polyurethane
ioam. 50mm in diameter and 80mm length is positioned
in the center of the box. The
igniters are resistively heated ceramic elements. The fuel sample is instrumented
with 6 thermocouples,
located at various positions to measure the smolder reaction temperature
and its propagation throughout
the sample. The temperature
and igniter current measurements
are displayed on two digital displays and
recorded with a video camera.
Currently' we are in the process of analyzing the data from the experiment,
and we expect to completed
the analysis within the next few months. However, preliminary temperature
histofiessuch
as that of Fig.
4, which correspond to a test with the axial igniter and the fan on, indicate that although incipient smolder
occurred, and seemed to be more intense than in normal gravity,, the smolder reaction itself was not selfsustained and did not propagate beyond the vicinity of the igniter. A possible reason for this is that the
incipient smolder reaction chokes itself with its own products by diluting the surrounding
air. In microgravity, diffusion of oxidizer toward the reaction zone seem to be too slow to counteract this dilution process, Although we believe that for the same igniter conditions the smolder leaction would not propagate
254

in normalgravity, ither,we thinkthatthiswill bc dueto convectiveoolingeffectsandno to chemical
e
c
reaction
effccts.
III. FUTURERESEARCH

PROGRAM

The future research program maintains the general guidelines established during the current research program. It contains two major tasks; one that concentrates on the space based experiments;
and the other on
the ground based experiments, and on the development
and verification of theoretical models.
lIl.l

(;round

Based Smoldering

lII. !. 1 Effect of Buoyancy

Experiments

on Forced

Flow Smoldering

The experiments
on the effect of buoyancy on forced flow smoldering
will be continued.
A parametric
study will be made of the influence of parameters
such as the fucl type and void fraction, the oxidizer
oxygen concentration,
ambient temperaturc and pressure, on the gravity effects. Experiments
to study the
effects of oxidizer temperature and oxygen concentration
will bc conducted
first. The former will affect
the rate of hcat losses from the reaction, and the latter the rate of heat release. These arc two competing
mechanisms
that determine the characteristics
of the smolder reaction.
111.1.2 Transition

Processes

in Smoldering

This is a very interesting task of the research program because transition
processes
such as ignition,
flaming and extinction arc issues of great importance
in the lirc safety licld. These processes are also
interesting
as a fundamental combustion
problem, and vcr3' little information
is currently available on
them.
The experiments
will concentrate
initially in the determination
of the conditions leading to smolder initiation (or ignitionl, and to flaming. Smolder ignition is very sensitive to porous fucl type, rate of heat addition, geometry of the experiment
and igniter, and temperature,
among others, and there is a need to
characterize
the process. There is also a need to come up with a protocol for the ignition of the foam that
is rcliable so that an automatized
ignition system can bc designed lot its use in the space experiments.
Concerning the tr:msition to Ilaming, the parametric study' currently being conducted will be continued to
determine the conditions leading to transition to tlaming. As the program progresses drop tower and parabolic flight tests will be planned to study these process under microgravity
conditions.
Since the characteristic time of the transition process is small (particularly flaming) it is expected that the ground base
microgravity
experiments will give useful inlormation.
Concurrent with the above experiments,
the analyses already developed of forced flow opposed and forward smoldering wilt bc extended to include linite rate kinetics. The objective is to predict those conditions were extinction of the reaction was observed experimentally.
The modeling
of the transition to
llaming both in onc-dimensional
and smoldering in an interface will also be continued.
Ill.2

Space

Experiments

This task will consist primarily, in the interaction with the NASA LcRC engineers in the design and construction of the space based experimental
apparatus. Also the data from the USML-I
smolder experiments will be analyzed and compared with the ground data. The results will be used to finalize the design
of the large scale space experiments

255

0

!._

e
(_"/"_)

i

\/

\

i

"-

e
tJ_e_

/

I

,4

/
_5

0

e,.

r,-

o _

0,
t.
"--_ ,0
e3 m
"r-

_E

256

f'_n_,,,,t'l m
t_l
_

i

U
W

T

m

o

i

:

:

.

/i//

_

_

=u,-.

'e"

e-

.-_

_-

",2

