d -~J--'13

£ 7307
NASA Conference Publication 10113

Second International
Microgravity
Combustion
orkshop
W

Proceedings of a workshop
held at the Cleveland Airport Marriott Hotel
Cleveland, Ohio
September 15-17, 1992

NI\5/\

NASA Conference Publication 10113

Second International
Microgravity
Combustion
Workshop
I
I
t

Proceedings of a workshop cosponsored by
NASA Headquarters,
Microgravity Science and Applications Division,
and Lewis Research Center,
Space Experiments Division,
and held at the Cleveland Airport Marriott Hotel
September 15-17,1 992

NI\S/\
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Office of Management

Scientific and Technical
Information Program
1993

PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Second International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, held in Cleveland, Ohio on September 15-17,
1992, was attended by about 160 people, mostly university professors and graduate students, from fourteen
countries. The purpose of the workshop was twofold: first, to exchange information with fire safety and
combustion researchers and managers about the progress and promise of combustion research in
microgravity, specifically in ground-based facilities like the NASA Lewis drop towers and the NASA
JSC/KC-135 as well as space-based facilities like the Shuttle and the planned Space Station Freedom.
Second, the workshop was a forum for an open discussion of areas into which microgravity combustion
science investigations could expand profitably, and which should be included in any upcoming NASA
Research Announcement (NRA).
Independent assessments by leading combustion researchers stated that combustion science in a microgravity
environment now has a prove n record of accomplishment and surprising discoveries; in the coming decades
it wi ll conti nue to offer a unique opport unity and challenge for generating new fundamental understanding of
widespread interest to people concerned with novel combustion processes here on Earth and in space.
Recommendations for new or expanded emphasis in an NRA included combustion synthesis of high-value
materials in space, metals combustion st udies in microgravity, and soot-generation mechanisms.
Forty papers were presented, including the first-look by the peer community at the results of the USML-l

(STS-SO) mission, which flew four successful combustion experiments. All papers are included in these
proceedings (along with one paper which was not presented at the authors' request). Also in these
proceedings are all of the audience's written questions or comments and the authors' replies, included at the
end of the relevant paper. When no questions or comments appear, it is not because none was offered at
the workshop; instead either the question/comment forms were mistakenly not passed out to the questioner,
or the questioner chose not to submit it for response, author reply, and publication. A closing plenary
meet ing was held, at wh ich oral summ aries of the contents of parallel technical sessions were provided by the
session cha irm e n; a brief synopsis of their summaries is also included in these proceedings.
A number of the papers included color plates, and because the color in microgravity combustion is often
critical to visualization of the process, these are included. Production requirements make it necessary to
group th ese color plates a t the end of the proceedings; all figures in the main body arc black and white.
Si ncere appreciation is offered to all who participated in this highly successful workshop, especially to the
microgravity combustion "disciplin e working group" who served as the steering committee for the workshop
(see at tached list), Col. Carl Meade of the STS-SO astronaut crew for sharing in a keynote dinner speech his
experi e nccs on two shuttle missions. the members of the Microgravity Combustion Branch at NASA Lewis
and of NASA Headquarters' Microgravity Science and Applications D ivision for servi ng as session chairman
and facilitators, and finally to the confe rence organizer'S support team (see attached list).
Dr. Howard D. Ross, Workshop Organizer
!\Iail Stop 500-217
NASA Lewis Research Center
210()O Brookpark Road
Cleveland, OH 44135
Phone (216) 433-2562 -- fAX (216) 433-8660

L_ _

.
p ge B\ank
preceding a
III

LISTS
DISCIPLINE WORKING GROUP MEMBERS
Professor Gerard Faeth, University of Michigan (Chair)
Professor Robe rt Altenkirch , Mississippi State University
Dr. Bradley Carpenter, NASA Headquarters
Dr. R aymond Friedman, Factory Mutual (retired)
Professor J ack Howard, Massachusetts Institute of T echnol ogy
Professor Chung K. (Ed) Law, Princeton University
Mr. Kurt Sacksteder, NASA Lewis
Professor Robert Santoro, Pennsylvania State University
Professor Mitchell Smooke, Yale University
Professor Forman Willia ms, University of California--San Diego
CONFERENCE SUPPORT CORE TEAM
Sverdrup T echnology, Inc. tcam: Ri chard Zicgfcld, John Toma, Karen Fandrich , a nd .lack Ha rper.

iv

I

I

I

_J

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SESSION
A - PLENARY SESSION (Chair, Jack Salzman) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1
The World of NASA Microgravity Science
Robert C. Rhome, NASA Headquarters ............... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Overview of NASA's Microgravity Combustion Science and Fire Safety Program
Howard D. Ross, NASA Lewis . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
An Overview of European Activities on Microgravity Combustion
Iskender Gokalp, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ....................
Japan's Microgravity Combustion Science Program
Jun'ichi Sato, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. . ...................

3
9
21
27

B - PLENARY SESSION (Chair, Kurt Sacksteder) ....................................... 33
Capabilities and Constraints of Typical Space Flight Hardware
John M. Koudelka, NASA Lewis ..........................•....... .. ....... 35
Capabilities and Constraints of NASA's Ground-Based Reduced Gravity Facilities
Jack Lekan,* Eric S. Neumann, and Raymond G. Sotos, NASA Lewis ................ 45
Capabilities and Constraints of Combustion Diagnostics in Microgramy
Paul S. Greenberg, NASA Lewis ..... . ... . ................................. 61
Priorities for Microgravity Combustion Researcb and Goals for Workshop Discussio~
Gerard M. Faeth, University of Michigan ..................................... 67
FuUerenes Formation in Flames
Jack B. Howard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology .................•........ 73
Pincipals of Gas Phase Processing of Ceramics During Combustion
Michael R. Zachariah, National Institute of Standards and Technology ............... 81
C - DIFFUSION FLAMES AND DIAGNOSTICS (Chair, Robert Santoro) ..................... 89
Effects of Buoyancy on Laminar, T~tional, and Turbulent Gas Jet Diffusion Flames
M. Yousef Bahadori, * et aI., Science Applications International Corporation ........... 91
Structure and Soot Properties of Non-Buoyant Laminar Round-Jet Diffusion Flames
Saeed Mortazavi and Gerard Faeth,* Univer sity of Michigan ..................... 107
An Experimental and TbeoreticaJ Study of Radiative Extinction of Diffusion Flames
Arvind Atreya,* et ai., Michigan State University ...•...........•.............. 115
Soot Formation and Radiation in Turbulent J et Diffusion Flames Under Nonnal and
Reduced Gravilf Conditions
Jerry C. Ku, et ai., Wayne State University ................................. 121
Visualization and Imaging Methods for Flames in Microgravity
Karen J. Weiland, NASA Lewis . . ...•... .... . ............................• 135
Selected Microgravity Combustion Diagnostic Techniques
DeVon W. G riffin, Sverdrup Technology, Inc. and Paul S. Greenberg, NASA Lewis .... 141
Laser Diagnostics for Microgravity Droplet Studies
Michael Winter, United Technologies Research Center .......................... 149
*Presenter

v
_ . _ - - - --

~

SESSION

D - PREMIXED FLAMES (Chair, Mitchell Smooke) ............................. .... ... 157
Studies of Premixed Laminar and Turbulent Flames at Microgravity
Paul D. Ronney, Princeton University ......................................
Modeling of Microgravity COOIbustion Experiments
John Buckmaster, University of Illinois - Urbana ..............................
Structure and Dynamics of Premixed Flames in Microgravity
K. Kailasanath, Naval Research Laboratory and G. Patnaik, Berkeley Research
Associates ...........................................................
On the Structure and Stabilization Mechanisms of Planar and Cylindrical
Premixed Flames
James A. Eng, Delin Zhu, and Chung K. Law,'" et aI., Princeton University ...........
The Effects of Gravity on Wrinkled Laminar Flames
L.W. Kostiuk, L. Zhou, and R.L. Cheng,* Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory ...........
Microgravity Combustion of Dust Suspensions
John H.s. Lee,'" Olivier Peraldi, and Rom Knystautas, McGill University ........ . ...
The Structure of Particle Cloud Premixed Flames
K. Seshadri, University of California - San Diego ..............................
Combustion Synthesis of Ceramic and Metal-Matrix Composites
John J. Moore,'" et aI., Colorado School of Mines ..............................

159
165

171

177
183
189
197
203

E - PLENARY DINNER (Chair, Robert Rhome) .. . .................................... 211
Fire Safety Practices in the Shuttle and the Space Station Freedom
Robert Friedman, NASA Lewis ........................................... 213
The USML-l Mission from an Astronaut's Perspective
Carl Meade (USAF), USML-l Mission Specialist (no paper included)
F - IGNITION, SMOLDER, AND FLAME SPREAD OF CONDENSED PHASE FUELS
(Chair, Raymond Friedman) ................................................ 227
Ignition and Subsequent Flame Spread Over a Thin CeUulosic Material
Kazuyoshi Nakabe,* Howard R. Baum, and Takashi Kashiwagi, National Institute of
Standards and Technology ...............................................
Opposed-Flow Flame Spreading in Reduced Gravity
Robert A. Altenkirch,'" et aI., Mississippi State University ..................... . ..
Combustion of Solid Fuel in Low Speed Oxygen Streams
James S. T'ien,'" et aI., Case Western Reserve University ........................
A Fundamental Study of Smoldering Combustion in Microgravity
Carlos Fernandez-Pello'" and Patrick J. Pagni, University of California - Berkeley ......
Flame Spread Across Liquid Pools
Howard Ross,'" et aI., NASA Lewis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Study of Ignition Phenomena of Bulk Metals by Radiant Heating
Melvin C. Branch,* et aI., University of Colorado .......... . ........ • .. . .......
"'Presenter

vi

229
237

245
251
257

265

-~- -~-

--

---

SESSION
Metals Combustion in Nonnal Gravity and Microgravity
Theodore A. Steinberg,* and D. Bruce Wilson, Lockheed and Frank J. Benz,
NASA White Sands Test Facility ............................................ 273
G - DROPLET AND SPRAY COMBUSTION (Chair and presenter, Fonnan Williams) ........... 281
Studies of Droplet Buming and Extinction
F.A. Williams, University of California - San Diego ......•.................•...... 283
ComputationallExperimentai Studies of Isolated, Single Component Droplet Combustion
Frederick L. Dryer, Princeton University •..•.......•..•.....•.•......••..•.... 291
Combustion Experiments in Reduced Gravity with Two-Component Miscible Droplets
Benjamin D. Shaw* and Israel Aharon, University of California - Davis ............... 297
Status of tbe CNRS-LCSR Program on High ~ Droplet Vaporization and Buming
Christian Chauveau and Iskender Gokalp, * Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique .. 303
High-Pressure Droplet Combustion Studies
M. Mikami,* et al., University of Tokyo ..•..........•.......•................. 311
Combustion of Interacting Droplet Arrays in a Microgravity Environment
Daniel L. Dietrich,* Sverdrup Technology, Inc. and John B. Haggard, NASA Lewis ....... 317
Tbe Eledrospray: Fundamentals and Combustion Applications
Alessandro Gomez, Yale University ......................... •..•.....•........ 325
Characterizing Droplet Combustion of Pure and Multicomponent Liquid Fuels in a
Microgravity Environment
Gregory S. Jackson and C. Thomas Avedisian, Cornell University (paper handed out but not
orally delivered at workshop) .... ........ ................................... 331
B - FINAL PLENARY SESSION (Chair, Bradley Carpenter) .............................. 339

Session Summaries .......................•................................. 341
COWR PI..A1'ES ....................................................•.......•. 347
LISf OF A'ITENDEES .•....•...... ...... .....•...............•.........••...... 369

*Presenter

vii

- I

1-

SESSION A - PLENARY SESSION

(Chair, Jack Salzman)

THE WORLD OF NASA MICROGRAVITV SCIENCE
Robert C. Rhome, P.E.'
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, D.C. 20546

Introduction
It has been said the the decade of the 1990's represents a second golden age of
science. We are in the midst of one of the most exciting and interesting
periods in the history of exploration - - a period which holds the potential for
expanding our understanding of scientific phenomena ranging from intricacies
of the universe to the subtleties of our own planet. The opportunities to
study the effects of microgravity in space seem limitless during the next
decade. Using the European Space Agency (ESA) built Spacelab, we will
maximize opportunities for development of new microgravity facilities in
order to obtain new information and increase our understanding of the effects
of gravitational forces on phenomena in biological, chemical and physical
systems. NASA intends to move aggressively, but sensibly, to develop
additional space research facilities as we build toward the unique Space
Station Freedom resources becoming available towards the end of this decade.
In the Space Studies Board's 1992 report, Toward a Microgravity Research
Strategy, the Committee on Microgravity Research recommended that a long
term research strategy be developed for microgravity sciences. The report
defined the the overall goals of the field and summarized the current
knowledge of its subdisciplines. In addition, the Committee concluded that
this strategy should identify the fundamental questions that need to be
addressed and the scientific community's ability to address them. For those of
us involved in developing and supporting a growing microgravity science
research program, this was yet another indicator that the field of low gravity
research is beginning to prove its merit.
• Director, Microgravity Science and Applications Division

Office of Space Science and Applications

-----------

3

- - - --

Preceding Page Blank

NASA's Microgravitv Science Research Program
NASA funds a robust microgravity research program in a wide variety of
microgravity related disciplines. Each research task is designed to yield a
better understanding of phenomena within th e areas of biotechnology,
combustion , fluid dynamics and transport phenomena, and materials sciences .
The knowledge gained from research in one field often has impacts in another.
Investigations sponsored as part of the microgravity science program share
one characteristic; th ey required reduced or very low gravity conditions in
order to achieve th eir objectives.
The overall Microgravity Research Program is conducted through integrated
ground-based and flight programs. The primary functions of the ground-based
research program is to develop concepts that lead to flight experiments - - to
determine limitations of various terrestrial processing techn iques - - and to
provide analysis and modeling support to the flight program. Alth ough we
support research than can be completed in the gro und-based program, a
successful ground-based research program is generally the first step in the
process towards flight experimentation. At the start of 1992, the
Microgravity Science and Applications Division was supporting a total of 115
microgravity research Principal Investigators; 73 in the ground-based program
and 42 in the flight program.
Ground-based Research
The ground-base research program has continu ed to perform the essential
functions of providing theoretical and experimental background to support
current flight experiments, and to nurture ideas and efforts that may later
form the basis of future flight experiments. The program has used several
types of unique facilities providing varying durations of reduced gravity
environments such as drop tubes, drop towers, and aircraft. The most active of
these ground facilities include two drop towers here at Lewis Research
Center, wherein the sample and equipment can be protected from the drop
environment and provide a low gravity environment for 2-5 seconds, and a drop
tube at Marshall Space Flight Center. Aircraft in parabolic flight trajectories
can provide reduced gravity durations of up to nearly 30 seconds; a KC-135
aircraft at the Johnson Space Center and a Learjet Model 25 here at the Lewis
Research Center are available. In addition to the test facilities, the
Microgravity Materials Science Laboratory here at Lewis Research Center
provides an extensive computational and modeling capability.
4

In a continuing effort to expand the microgravity research community, we have
supported several ground-based efforts in the academic community. The
Graduate Student Researchers Program is one means where students, under the
guidance of a faculty sponsor, can perform microgravity research using
ground-based low gravity facilities. Secondly, government, industry, and
university cooperation is encouraged through an active post-doctoral and
Visiting Senior Scientist program. Recent Ph.D's, tenured professors, and
nationally known experts can spend one to two years conducting research at a
NASA center or can participate in science planning and management at NASA
Headquarters.
In addition, we disseminate results from both the ground-based and
flight-based research programs to the scientific community-at-Iarge through
participation in conferences, forums, and workshops. These include such
meetings as Gordon Research conferences, American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics science meetings, Committee on Space Research (CaSPAR)
conferences, International Astronautical Federation conferences, European
Symposia on Materials and Fluid Sciences in Microgravity, and at workshops
such as this Second International Workshop on Combustion Science in
Microgravity. In this way we are expanding our base throughout the
low-gravity research community.
The Flioht Program: Research-jn-Space
As our experience becomes more fine-tuned and as we more effectively use
gravity as an exoerimental parameter, we will be able to realize the potential
offered by this new age of low-gravity research. The sheer number of space
science missions related to microgravity sciences in the years between 1991
and 1993 is dramatic. More microgravity research will have been conducted
within these years than has been conducted over the preceding decade.
Significant effort is spent in preparation for a number of upcoming Space
Shuttle missions. Multi-user and experiment-unique apparatus will be flown
abroad the Shuttle periodically over the next six years in various payload
configurations. The European developed Spacelab module is an important tool
in supporting low gravity research. This year the International Microgravity
Laboratory (IML), the United States Microgravity Laboratory (USML), and the
Japanese/U.S. collaborative Spacelab-J mission utilized the pressurized
Spacelab module. The U.S. Microgravity Payload (USMP), an unpressurized
system in the Shuttle payload bay is to be first flown in October 1992. These
Spacelab missions form a foundation for future microgravity research on
space Station Freedom. This research will continue as Shuttle and

5

I

Spacelab fl ights are projected into 1998 as our basic research vehicle prior
to access to Space Station . Another payload configuration is the commercial
middeck accommodations module, Spacehab, scheduled to beg in a series of
flights in 1993.
Most of the recently launched and upcoming microgravity missions have an
international component, fosteri ng cooperation and an exchange of know ledge
benefiting the entire science community. When combined with other
international cooperative flight prog rams, such as the .EJ.!ropean BQtrievable
karrier (EURECA) series, th e German Spacelab-D2, th e Japanese/ U.S.
col laborative Spacelab-J mission, and the European Space Agency (ESA)
proposed Spacelab-E1 and Spacelab-E2 missions, there should be frequent and
routine access to space and its research opportunities during the remainder of
the decade.
Supporting Research & Technology
Flight experience has demonstrated that an early investment in technology
specific to the microgravity program is essential. In order to achieve this,
NASA funds research activities that seek to create or refine equipment that
would en hance the scientific quality of future microgravity flight
experiments. Technology development not specifically on the critical path of
any particular fl ight project is funded through the Advanced Technology
Development (ATD) program. The supporting technology development includes
fundamental research that supports the goals and objectives of the overall
microgravity science program. An example of this activity is the development
of systems to characterize the reduced-gravity environment of space
experiments.
Space Station Freedom Utilization
Beginning as early as 1997, the Space Station will offer the environment,
power, and duration necessary to pursue a wide range of scientific research .
Extending on-orbit research time from the seconds and minutes of sound ing
rockets to the hours and days of the Shuttle and Spacelab program was a key
element in the growth in research in which gravity is the experi mental
parameter. The Space Station extends the opportunity several orders of
magnitude. Definition of several multi-user microgravity facilities for
potential use on the Space Station began during the 1990-1991 ti me period.
Hardware requ irements necessary to support these facilities continue to be
identified in order to influence Space Station design. The precursor payloads

6

-

~-

--

-

-~-

---

flown on Shuttle missions and the research conducted provide experience for
the operations and development of instrumentation and subsystems for use on
the Space Station.
Space Station Freedom will provide a stable platform on which highly
productive and flexible microgravity science experiment modules can be based.
A key long term program goal is the development of several multi-user
facilities specifically designed for long duration scientific research missions.
We are studying several facility concepts to support the microgravity science
research we expect will be conducted aboard the Space Station during the
period 1997 and 2004. Some of this early hardware could be of Spacelab
heritage - - consistent with our "go as you learn" strategy.
The Modular Combustion Facility, probably of most interest to this Workshop,
could support a wide range of science experiments dealing with the study of
combustion and its by-products. The facility is currently planned for flight
aboard the Space Station as early as 1998. Advanced combustion experiment
hardware is presently being defined for Spacelab missions in the mid 1990's
as precursors to the Modular Combustion Facility experiments. It is likely that
recommendations from this workshop will influence the research
announcement leading to the selection of many of the early Space Station
Freedom combustion Principal Investigators.
The Future for Microgravity Science Research
Microgravity Research within the United States has an optimistic future. The
President proposed a budget for Fiscal Year 1993 that represented a doubling
of the funding for microgravity research over three years.
We have established four science Discipline Working Groups in the areas of
Biotechnology, Combustion, Fluids and Transport Phenomena, and Materials
Science. These groups are responsible for maintaining an overview of the
efforts in the discipline areas and for providing an annual assessment of the
program. They are to recommend refinements and science priorities within
the discipline, and to identify the programs, strengths and weaknesses, as
well as the most promising areas for investigation and the most advantageous
approaches for experimentation.
We are using a series of NASA Research Announcements (NRA's), ali open to the
international science community, to select principal investigators for
ground-based research, for flight experiment definition, and for space-based
research. The NRA for combustion science issued in 1989 to solicit

L _ _ _ _ _ __

7

ground-based and flight experiments produced 65 proposals, the NRA for Fluids
and Materials Science Containerless Processing released in 1990 produced 69
proposals. Four NRA's were released in 1991 -- the fluid dynamics and
transport phenomena NRA produced 205 proposals; the biotechnology NRA
produced 94 proposals; the materials science NRA produced 141 proposals; and
the NRA for fundamental science produced 51 proposals -- or a total of 491
proposals from NRA's released in 1991. In August 1992 we selected 122
Principal Investigators from these four NRA's - - a selection rate
approximating 25%. This raises the number of Principal Investigators in the
microgravity science program from 115 in 1992 to over 190 in 1993.
We are looking toward a 3-fold increase in funded Principal Investigators
prior to Space Station Freedom Permanently Manned Capability in 1999. We
plan to release research announcements in the coming years in order to
continue to obtain high quality scientific investigations. Workshops such as
this one will contribute to the content definition of future research
announcements.

Conclusions
The research in space we applaud in 1992 and 1993 is based upon plans laid in
the mid to late 1980's. It has taken several years to develop and define a
successful research plan. The present series of microgravity research
missions is based upon work that was started almost a decade ago , and has
evolved through successful international cooperation , planning and
establishment of clearly defined research goals.
These are exciting times for those of us involved in microgravity research -and we have only begun to define the work that needs to be done. So at the
onset of this Second International Workshop on Combustion Science in
Microgravity -- let us agree to start the cycle again , to plan for the research
opportunities in the years ahead, using the Spacelab, free-flyers and , of course
Space Station Freedom. Clearly, securing the promise of successful
microgravity research for the late 1990's, both in the laboratory and in space,
demands a science dialogue such as that supported by workshops like this one.
I wish you well in your endeavors this week.

8

I
t

OVERVIEW OF NASA'S MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION SCIENCE AND

I
FIRE SAFETY PROGRAM
Howard D. Ross
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
The study of fundamental combustion processes in a microgravijy environment is a relatively new scientific
endeavor. A few simple, precursor experiments were conducted in the early 1970's. Today the advent of
the U.S. space shuttle and the anticipation of the Space Station Freedom provide for sCientists and
engineers a special opportunity -- in the form of long duration microgravity laboratories -- and need -- in
the form of spacecraft fire safety and a variety of terrestrial applications -- to pursue fresh insight into the
basic physics of combustion. Through microgravity, a new range of experiments can be performed since :

• Buoyancy-induced flows are nearly eliminated. Due to the hot, less dense reaction products
of combustion , buoyancy-induced flows tend to develop in normal gravity experiments , promoting
self-turbulization and instabilities.
Microgravity reduces these flows and their attendant
complications, thus, furthering understanding of low-gravity behavior and, by direct comparison,
related normal-gravity combustion processes.
• Normally obscured forces and flows may be Isolated. Buoyancy frequently obscures
weaker forces, such as electrostatic, thermocapillary, radiative and diffusional forces , which may
be important near flammability limits. Further, the effect of low velocity forced flows can not
normally be studied due to the onset of mixed convection. By removing buoyancy, the roles of
these forces and flows may be observed, and compared to theory.
• Gravitational settling or sedImentatIon Is nearly elimInated. Unconstrained suspensions of
fuel droplets or particles may be created and sustained in a quiescent environment, eliminating the
need for mechanical supports, levitators, or stirring devices and enabling a high degree of
symmetry and/or quiescence to be achieved.
• Larger time or length scales In experiments become permissible. To limit buoyancy eHects
in normal gravity experiments, the size or duration of tests is often constrained . Microgravity
permits larger scale experiments which in turn allow more detailed diagnostic probing and
observation . Microgravity also enables new tests of similitude through experiment.
Combustion experiments have now been completed in drop towers and aircraft and have flown successfully
on the Shuttle. As will be discussed in various papers at this workshop, unexpected and unexplained
phenomena have been observed -- with surprising frequency -- in microgravity combustion experiments,
raising questions about the degree of accuracy and completeness of our textbook understanding and our
ability to estimate spacecraft fire hazards.
The interest in microgravity combustion science is not strictly academic. There have been four internal
"fire" incidents in the U.S. Shuttle program, involving overheating or smoldering of wire insu lation and
electrical components from localized loss of cooling air or electrical short circuits. In each case, the crew
observed the evolution of particles and odors; the potential fire ...:as immediately suppressed by swijchin
g off the appropriate circuits, without resorting to the discharge of fire extinguishers. A severe incident was
reported for the Soviet Salyut 7, requiring both the discharge of an extinguisher and venting of the uninhabited cabin atmosphere to the vacuum ,It space. The atmosphere of the space station was later
replenished by stores from a supply flight. This experience has demonstrated that present spacecraft fire
protection can respond to a variety of in-flight incidents. Nevertheless, there is growing appreciation for

This paper is excerpted in part from NASA TM1 0541 0 entitled "Microgravity Combustion Science : Progress,
Plans, and Opportunities" which was authored by members of the Microgravity Combustion Branch, Space Experiments
Division, NASA lewis Research Center. I have expanded it with several personal opinions and assessments.

9

the need for fundamental research and technology development with the longer-term objective of
investigating and improving spacecraft fire-safety practices. A more complete understanding of combustion
phenomena and flame characteristics contributes to the improvement of material acceptance standards,
fire detection, extinguishment, and postfire rehabilitation in space. Moreover, low-gravity combustion
research is necessary in assessing the effects of certain hazards that may be unique to or aggravated in
space - smoldering or aerosol fires, for example.
Low-gravity combustion experiments may also yield methods to produce exotic materials such as fullerenes
or highly ordered ceramic - metal composites. In this author's opinion, the costs of producing such
materials in a space environment will probably prohibit their widespread manufacture in space; however,
the results from space-based experiments could lead to needed understanding to produce these or related
materials more readily or cheaply on Earth. Similarly fundamental experiments in heterogeneous
combustion systems such as particle or aerosol clouds support improved understanding of Earth-based fire
environments (e.g. grain bins, mine safety, spray combustion processes). One recent idea this author has
heard involves using the long soot residence times available in microgravity to study agglomeration
phenomena to be used to understand atmospheric contamination by particles from large-scale fires such
as those which occurred recently in the oil fields in the Persian Gulf.

MICROGRAVITY LABORATORIES AND FACILITIES
There are several test facilities which provide a free fall or semi-free fall condition where the force of gravity
is offset by linear acceleration, thus enabling a reduced gravity environment available for scientific studies.
Each of the facilities has different capabilities and characteristics that must be considered by an investigator
when selecting the one best suited to a particular series of experiments. Perhaps the most unique and
challenging feature for researchers working in these facilities is the facility constraints . The researcher must
place new emphasis on experimental requirements for power, volume, operating time, and weight.
Operation is remote , being automated in the drop towers or through astronauts on the shuttle. Delicate
hardware must be considered for shock isolation in the drop towers although items such as mirrors and
incandescent lights regularly survive landing. Compatibility with vacuum environments may be needed as
well. Balanced against these difficulties or constraints is the unique opportunity for scientific discovery,
already verified in combustion experiments in microgravity: thought-provoking and surprising observations
are the norm for nearly every experiment we have conducted.
To date, the majority of combustion studies have taken place in the NASA Lewis Research Center's (LeRC)
two drop towers and Model 25 Learjet. The 2.2 Second Drop Tower, as the name implies, provides 2.2
seconds of low gravity test time for experiment packages with up to 150 kilograms of hardware mass . To
lower residual acceleration, the experiment freely falls inside in an air drag shield. The facility offers both
low cost and rapid turnaround time between experiments. It is often used for proof-of-concept or precursor
experimentation; most microgravity combustion experimental investigations start here. The 5.18 second
Zero-Gravity Facility with its 132 meter free fa/l distance in an evacuated drop chamber (again to lower
residual accelerations) allows experiments of up to 450 kilograms in mass mounted in a one meter
diameter drop bus. This facility probably provides the lowest available accelerations available today.
Specially modified jet aircraft flying parabolic trajectories can provide significant increases in low-gravity
experiment time when compared to drop towers but not without the penalty of higher gravity levels. For
an experiment fixed to the body of an aircraft, accelerations in the range of 10-2 g can be obtained for up
to 20 seconds. During one flight several trajectories are possible. While aircraft may not offer true
microgravity, they offer the significant advantages of permitting researchers to monitor their experiments
in real-time, reconfigure them between trajectories and utilize delicate instrumentation precluded in drop
tower tests because of severe shock loadings at the end of the drop. NASA's larger KC-135 aircraft at the
Johnson Space Center also permits free-floated experiments achieving acceleration levels in the range of
10-4 g for 5 to 8 seconds. Up to 40 trajectories can be performed in a Single flight.

10

Although they have not yet been used by the U.S. microgravity combustion program, sounding rockets can
provide a reduced gravity environment of 10-4 g for about 300 seconds. Their use is presently being
considered for experiments in flame spread over liquid pools and thick solids; the hardware is being built
with plans for future users to fly the same or similar hardware tor other combustion experiments.
Truly long duration microgravity combustion expe riments require space-based laboratories such as the U.S.
space shuttle or Space Station Freedom. Qualification of materials and assurance of safety for combustion
experiments imposes an all-new set of concem s to the new researcher, although here NASA engineers
who are experienced with the voluminous handbooks and requirements provide a great deal of help. The
shuttle flight duration for science missions is 7 to 13 days; our experience with combustion experiments
is they required as little as 0.5 crew-hours or, for the set of experiments on USML-1 (STS-50), up to 20
crew-hours (this is not a hard limit). Power, volume, and weight allowances depend on where an
experiment is mounted in the shutlle (e.g. mid-deck locker, glovebox, cargo bay) and the type of mission
(e.g. Spacelab). Substantial astronaut involvement is not only possible but encouraged for mid-deck or
Spacelab experiments. While the crew is not necessarily expert in combustion, they are quite
knowledgable on the unique features of microgravity and have improved, in real-time, the Scientific yield
from several experiments due to this knowledge.
The most common complaint of microgravity researchers is the long hardware development time and the
difficulty in gaining frequent access to a space environment. In the future, Space Station Freedom will
provide more opportunity as well as the highest quality, longest duration reduced gravity laboratory. Within
its instrument racks will be dedicated space, electrical power, and advanced diagnostic instrumentation for
microgravity combustion experiments. Multi-user experiments will be conducted in experiment "modules"
by scientific specialists. Principal investigators on Earth will have the capability of monitoring and modifying
in real-time the performance of their experiments. This future facility, along with the means by which
investigators' experiments will be selected for flight, are discussed elsewhere in this workshop.

MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION EXPERIMENTS AND SPACECRAFT
FIRE SAFETY
In this workshop, the currently supported microgravity combustion studies are reviewed ; they are listed in
Table 1, noting that this list does not include completed or nearly completed microgravity combustion
studies such as those experiments which have flown on the Shuttle (Solid Surface Combustion Experiment;
Smoldering Combustion in Microgravity; Wire Insulation Flammability ; and Candle Flames in Microgravity) .
Also shown in the table are the current facilities for the currently supported experiments; the NASA HQselected candidates for space-based testing are listed with their likely carrier. The flight candidates were
selected through a NASA Research Announcement (see Program Participation section below) and began
their efforts in the ground-based facilities several years ago .
Substantial differences between normal and microgravity flames have been observed in combustion
systems such as burning droplets, Burke-Schumann flames, laminar, transitional and turbulent gas-jet
diffusion flames, flame spread over solids and liquid pools, cellular and freely propagating premixed
gaseous flames, smoldering combustion, and candle flames. Normally considered weak, diffusional and
radiative processes have been shown to have significant influence on low gravity flames. In addition to new
examinations of classical problems, current areas of interest include soot formation and agglomeration and
weak turbulence, as influenced by gravity. The next generation of experiments will likely include and may
expand beyond these areas, into such endeavors as combustion synthesis of materials.
Currently NASA and international human-crew space missions incorporate various means of fire protection,
emphasizing fire prevention but including provisions for fire detection and extinguishment. There are
several reasons for ongoing scientific and engineering interest. Safety strategies are evolutionary
processes and must be subject to periodic review and updating as the knowledge of microgravity
combustion grows and new consensus standards in aircraft and related fields are developed. The complex

11

missions and environment of future spacecraft, particularly the permanently orbiting Space Station Freedom ,
create a demand for unique and innovative approaches to fire safety. Improved knowledge can optimize
safety factors and provide tradeoffs of minimal risk against greater utilization of spacecraft facilities. A
series of experiments is underway examining fire detection methods, extinguishment methods, and
combustion product evolution and dispersion.

MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION DIAGNOSTICS DEVELOPMENT
Compared to normal gravity experiments, low-gravity instrumentation has been simple, consisting of movie
films and intrusive temperature and velocity probes such as thermocouples and hot wire anemometers
(calibration of the latter for low-gravity applications is a concern, especially for the low-velocities usually of
interest). This was due to the forementioned constraints on reduced gravity experimentation. However,
to better understand the unique results obtained in low-gravity combustion experiments, more sophisticated
diagnostic systems are strongly needed. This has motivated an emphasis on developing small , low-power
and lightweight optical techniques because they are non-perturbative, and suited to the acquisition of multidimensional data fields (e.g. two and three dimensional imaging) while being usable in flight hardware. As
with all microgravity experiments, development proceeds from development and testing in a normal gravity
laboratory to demonstration in the ground-based facilities to repackaging / design and use in space flight
hardware.
Table 2 lists methods in active deSign, development, testing, or demonstration in the low gravity facilities.
Intensified CCO array cameras with sensitivity below conventional detectors or photographic films have
revealed heretofore unseen flame structures and behaviors, especially in dilute hydrogen mixtures aboard
the KC-135. Platinum silicide arrays for imaging in the near and mid-infrared are now available with
sensitivity permitting bandpass filtering to isolate weak spectral emissions. This allows two dimensional
temperature field measurements of known emissivity radiators, such as soot or grids of thin (15 micron)
ceramic fibers. Such fibers are already being used in the drop towers for the qualitative assessment of
temperature distributions in droplet and gas jet diffusion flames. A more complete characterization of the
IR spectrum may enable the determination of major species concentrations and temperatures.
Relative to phase-sensitive, interferometric methods, the rainbow schlieren method tends to be simpler,
more tolerant to mechanical and thermal fluctuations, and readily adaptable to large fields of view. The
present system with continuously graded co lor filters has achieved comparable sensitivity to conventional
interferom etry. A quantitative determination of the refractive index distribution has been completed and is
in being prepared for publication. This system has been employed in normal gravity to measure refractive
index distributions in and above liquid pools and in axially symmetric jet diffusion flames. A system of this
type is being assembled in a rig for reduced gravity tests in the 2.2 second drop tower facility, and has
flown successfully aboard the KC-135 .
Soot measurements are being conducted using transmission, scattering, and sampling techniques to
determine soot size and concentration. These techniques have been incorporated into a 2.2 sec drop tower
rig with the initial configuration accommodating full-field absorption measurements using a low power laser
source, and soot sampling using a thermophoretic probe. For the latter, small wire electron microscopy grids
are rapidly inserted into the flame and withdrawn (total residence time of approximately 30 milliseconds)
with the size distribution of the soot particles then determined from the analysis of scanning electron
micrographs.
In the longer range, particle image and laser doppler velocimetry systems are in development for use in lowgravity facilities. Prototype hardware is available for these measurements. Instrumentation for the
determination of temperature and species concentration via near-I R laser light absorption is also under
development.

12

-----

-

-~ . ~ . --

--

--

-

MULTI-USER SPACE FLIGHT HARDWARE
Multi-user hardware is planned, intended to reduce cost and development time for space-based
experiments. Elements of the flight hardware must be compatible with experiments several years from
conception, but predictions of need are difficult: it is recognized that most experiments will need some
unique subsystems to be developed especially and individually. NASA has adopted an evolutionary
approach to multi-user space flight hardware. Experiment payloads, such as the Solid Surface Combustion
Experiment, dedicated to the requirem ents of a single investigator are to be followed by more advanced
Shuttle payloads each of which can accommodate a class of experiments.
The next set of combustion flight hardware will attempt to utilize a common set of components and
subsystems in required configurations for a first series of flight experiments. Carriers such as Getaway
Special Canisters (GASCANs), sounding rockets and cargo-bay mounted systems will be analyzed by
NASA engineers for potential use in the next generation of experiments. Table 1 includes the currently
planned carrier for flight project candidates. The first complete multi-user facility where many of these
components and subsystems will be permanently mounted will be the Combustion Module (CM-1) to fly on
Space Station Freedom or possibly on Spacelab. Finally, a Modular Combustion Facility (MCF), evolving
from CM-1, is planned for Space Station Freedom.

OPPORTUNITIES FOR PROGRAM PARTICIPATION
NASA provides financial and facility support, typically for a three year "definition study" period, to academic
and industrial principal investigators. Their initial proposals and subsequent progress are evaluated via the
peer review process which addresses the following types of questions:

"Is there a clear need for microgravity experimentation, particularly space-based experimentation?
"Is the effort likely to result in a significant advance to the state of understanding?
"Is the scientific problem being examined of sufficient intrinsic interest or practical application?
"Is the conceptual design and technology required to conduct the experiment sufficiently developed to
ensure a high probability of success?
Principal investigators (P .I.'s) collaborate with a NASA technical monitor to conduct the necessary research.
Work in the drop towers and aircraft is strongly encouraged in this period. If it is believed that, following
the definition study, space flight experiments are justified, the P.I.'s propose through a competitive
solicitation (described below) a shuttle flight experiment. If they win award through this SOlicitation, they
become flight candidates. Soon thereafter, the P.I.'s present their detailed objectives, test requirements,
and the conceptual hardware deSign to another independent review panel comprised of scientific and engineering peers who assess the ability of the proposed flight experiment to meet its objectives. If this
"Conceptual Design Review" is successful, NASA assigns a team of engineers and scientists to the
multi-year development of space flight hardware which meets the P.I.'s specifications. NASA continues
to support the P.I.'s throughout this development to conduct further research, provide consultation, and
support the design and safety reviews prior to space flight. The nominal timeframe from flight experiment
candidacy to manifest on the shuttle is five years. The P .I.'s then monitor the conduct of the experiment
in flight, and subsequently analyze and are obliged to publish the data in an archival journal.
The above scenario is "typical" for shuttle-based experiments, however NASA also supports theoretical and
diagnostics research as well as microgravity experiments which can be completed in the drop towers or
aircraft.
Proposals for either definition study or flight experiment candidacy are solicited via a NASA Research
Announcement (NRA); the first NRA focussed on microgravity combustion science was issued in
Decem ber, 1989. It resulted in 13 definition study awards and 6 flight experim ent candidacy awards out

13

of 65 proposals. The only path to selection for flight project candidacy is through an NRA, i.e. through a
competitive, peer-reviewed selection process. It is planned that an NRA for microgravity combustion
science will be issued every three years. It is planned that a multi-disciplinary NRA, which will permit
proposals for ground-based studies in microgravity combustion science, will be issued in the three-year
period between combustion-specific NRAs. Finally, NASA offers graduate students financial support
through its Graduate Student Research Program, and post-doctorate fellowships through the National Research Council. More information about the details of these programs and the process of proposal
submission , progress reviews and space flight project selection is available by writing to the Microgravity
Combustion Branch, MS 500-217, NASA Lewis Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, Ohio
44135.

14

Table 1: Today's Microgravity Combustion Science and Spacecraft Fire Safety Projects
Nomenclature: DT -- 2.2 sec Drop Tower; HOT -- Hokkeldo (Japan) Drop Tower; ZGF - 5.18 sec Zero Gravity Facility; SR -- Sounding Rocket; GAS - GASCan In cargo
2.2
••
bay of Shuttle; SSF •• Space Station Freedom; Mlddeck - Mlddeck of Shuttle

I

I

TITLE

INVESTIGATORS

I

FACILITIES

"Low-Velocity. Opposed-flow Flame Spread in a Transport-Controlled. Microgravity Experiment"
·Low-Velocity,
Transport·Controlled,
Experiment·

Robert A. Altenkirch
Subrala
Subrata Bhattacharjee
Sandra L. Olson

DT; ZGF;
Laarjet; SR
or Middeck

"Risk-Based Fire Salety Experiment"
·Risk-Based
Safety Experiment·

George E. Apestolakis
Apostolakis
Ivan Canon
Catton

DT; Learjet

Flames·
·An
"An Experimental and Theo retical Study of Radiative Extinction of Diffusion Flames"

Arvind Atreya
Indrek S. Wichman

DT

·Gravitational
Flames·
"Gravitational Effects on Turbulent Gas-Jet Diffusion Flames"

Yousef Bahadori
Dennis Stocker
Raymond Edelman

DT; ZGF;
KC-135

"Ignition and Combustion of Bulk Metals in a Microgravity Environment"
·Ignition
Environment·

Melvin C. Branch
Melvin C.
John Daily

KC-135

"Modeling of Microgravity Combustion Experiments"
Experiments·

John Buckmaster

"Gravitational Effects on Premixed Turbulent Flames: Studies of Dynamics of Wrinkled Laminar Flames in Microgravity"
·Gravitational

Robert K. Cheng

DT

"Combustion 01 Interacting Droplet Arrays in a Microgravity Environment"
of
Environment·

Daniel L. Dietrich

DT

Flames·
·Investigation
"Investigation of Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames in Microgravity : A Paradigm for Soot Processes in Turbulent Flames"

Gerard M. Faeth

KC-135; SSF

"A Fundamental Study of Smoldering Combustion in Microgravity"
·A
Microgravity·

A. Carlos Fernandez-Pella

Learjet; KC·
135; GAS

"Combustion 01 Electrostatic Sprays 01 liquid Fuels in Laminar and Turbulent Regimes"
of Liquid
Regimes·
·Combustion of

Alessandro Gomez
Mitchell Smooke
Marshall Long

TBD

·Ignition
Microgravity·
"Ignition and Subsequent Flame Spread in Microgravity"

Takashi Kashiwagi
Howard Baum

DT

·Modelling
"Modelling of Premixed Gas Flames in Microgravity"
Microgravity·

K. Kailasanath
Gopal Patnaik

I

0\

'"'0
.,

Cti
m

-

n

ro

Q.,
a.

::J

lO
""0
QJ
OJ
lO

,

ro

OJ
QJ
OJ

::J
7\

I

"

r __

I

I

1 ____

'Studies of Flame Structu re in Microgravity"
Structure
Microgravity·

-----

----~'

- ---

Jerry C. Ku
Paul Greenberg

DT
DT

C. K. Law

"Measurements and Modeling of Sooting Turbulent Jet Diffusion Flames Under Normal and Reduced Gravity Conditions"
Conditions·
·Measurements

I
1__

I

DT

I
I

- - -1

I

I

I

"Spacecraft Material Flammability Testing with Radiative Self-Heating"
Selt-Heating"

Thomas J. Ohlemiller

"Laminar Premixed Gas Combustion Experiments in Space"

Paul D. Ronney

DT; KC-135;;
KC-135
SSF

"Ignition and FI?me Spread Across Liquid Pools"

Howard D. Ross
D.
William A. Sirignano

ZGF;SR
ZGF; SA

"The Structure of Particle Cloud Premixed Flames"

K. Seshadri
l.
Abraham L. Berlad

"Combustion Experiments in Reduced Gravity with Two-Component Miscible Droplets"
Two -Component

Ben Shaw

DT

"Combustion of Solid Fuel in Very Low Speed Oxygen Streams"

James S. T ien
Tien
Kurt R. Sacksteder
R.

DT; KC-135

"High-Pressure Combustion of Binary-Fuel Droplets"
Droplels"

Forman A. Williams
Jun'ichi Sato
T. Niioka

DT;HDT

"Droplet Combustion Experiment"

Forman A. Williams
A.
Frederick L. Dryer

DT;
DT; ZGF;
Middeck

"Laser Diagnostics for Microgravity Droplet Combustion"
Combustion·

Michael Winter
Gregory Dobbs

DT; Learjet
Lear;et

I

I

I

......
'-.)

I

Table 2: Today's Microgravity Combustion Diagnostics
I.e.
Nomenclature: x - completed, 1.9. developed and demonstrated; I -- lestlng Is Imminent; d - active design or development

MEASUREMENT OR INSTRUMENT

1G

OT

ZGF

LEARJET

KC-135

Cine Cameras

x

x

x

x

x

Thermocouples. Radiometers and Pressure
Transducers

x

x

x

x

x

Soot Sampling via Thermophoretic Probing

x

x

Soot Volume Fraction via Light Attenuation and
Scattering

x

i

Soot Temperature via Pyrometry

i

Rainbow Schlieren

x (liquid and
gas phases)

i

Standard CCO Video
CCD

x

x

10 Itensified
1.ltensified Array Video wi Bandpass Filtering

SOUNDING
ROCKET

SHUTTLE
OR SSF
x

d

x
d
d

i

d
d (liquid
phase)

x

x

d

x
x

x

x

x

d

d

wi
UV Intensified Array Video wI Bandpass Filtering

x

i

IR Video wI Bandpass Filtering
wi

x

Planar (20) Temperature and CH and OH
Concentrations via Rayleigh Scattering and LlF

d

Light Sheet Flow Visualization or Velocimetry

x (liquid
phase)

Laser Doppler Velocimetry

d

Reactive Mie Scattering

x

Liquid Surface Temperature and Vapor Phase
Concentration via Exciplex Fluorescence

d

Thin Fiber Pyrometry

d

d

CH 4• CO2 , H20 Concentration via Line Absorption

x
x

d

Stable Species Concentration via Miniature Gas
Chromotography

-

x (gas phase)

i

x

00

I

l. __
L_~_

d
d

x (smoke)

d (liquid
phase)
i

I

d

COMMENTS
Question: (Clayton Meyers, NASA Lewis Research Center): (1) How does the fire safety program "interact"
with the evaluation of materials listed in MSFC-HDBK-527? Could a materials test program evolve to
evaluate new material proposed for space use critical for future mission(s) success?
(2) Could optical diagnostics initialized by other directorates (2000, 5000) be shared via some commonality
program/conference or other structured mechanism? Combustion byproducts analysis. laser ignition, laser
diagnostics, and seeding technologies are available.
Answer: (1) We have joint efforts with both MSFC and JSC on the exchange of information of lire safety
and combustion science research findings. We all are interested in, and we at LeRC are dcveloring
hardware for evaluating the flammability of common materi als in low-gravity to assess the degree of
conservatism of the 1-g test methods in the handbook you cite.
(2) Again, collaboration between directorates at LeRC exists. We presently share laboratories and
expensive instruments with the groups you cite, and attend each other's seminars. I assure you we do not
suffer from the "Not Invented Here" syndrome-- we are all too busy to reinvent exisling measurement
methods.

19

AN OVERVIEW OF EUROPEAN ACTIVITIES ON
MICROGRAVITV COMBUSTION
Iskender G6kalp
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Laboratoire de Combustion et Systemes Reactifs
45071 Orleans cMex 2, France

Introduction
The global ohjective of the European efforts in micro gravity combustion is to combine
theoretical and experimental work. both under normal and reduced gravity. to progress in the
basic understanding of gravity dependent phenomena in various combustion situations.
The first phase of the European activities on microgravity combustion has been summarized
in refs. 1. 2 and 3. This overview will summarize the more recent developments. The focus
will be on new experimental facilities. new research topics. and new collaborative efforts.
European experimental facilities for microgravity comhustion research
Parabolic nights of aircrafts have been and still are the most common reduced gravity means
used in Europe for combustion experiments. After the 1986-88 period during which the
:"JASA KC-I~5 aircraft \\Ias used hy the European combustion community (rd.2t ~llmhuslion
experimenl<; have heen conducted since 1989 in the Cemre dEssais en Vol. at Bn!tigny-surOrge. France during the paraholic nights of the C~S Caravelle. under the auspices of CNES
m ESNESTEC. The Caravelk aircraft. with modified engines and hydraulics and reinforced
structure. provides. during approximately 20 seconds per parabolae. mean reduced gravity
levels of 10- 2 go when the measuring equipment is attached to the aircraft structure. and
between 10- 3 and 10- 2 go if free tloated in the cabin. Some combustion experiments are also
taking advantage of the succession of normal-high-Iow-high gravity levels (ref. 4).
With the construction of the ZARM-Bremen Drop Tower. European combustion community
has a new facility providing much lower gravity levels than those obtained during parabolic
tlights. The ZARM Drop Tower is a 145.5 m high concrete tower which contains the drop
tube of diameter 3.5 m and 110 m height. The tower is designed as a vacuum chamber with a
residual air presure of 1 Pa. The free fall duration is 4.74 s. In a later development phase. the
experiment capsule could be launched from the bottom up to the tower top, almost doubling
the night time up to 9.4 s. The micro gravity level is of the order of 10-6 go- During the free
fall period the drop capsule is in constant contact with the command centre via telemetry.
remote control and television (ref. 5). A smaller drop tower (height 25 m, free fall time
approximately 2 s) is also operated for combustion experiments in Forrejon. Madrid. Spain.
by INTA (Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aerospacial) (ref. 6).
The use of sounding rockets for micro gravity combustion research is under preparation by
ESAIESTEC since icw years. The combustion experiments module under design aims the use
nf TEXUS sounding rocket program. whica. is a proven system. having been Hown

21

Preceding Page Blank

successfully many times from ESRANGE in Kiruna. Sweden, since 1977. With an
~xperim ental payload weight of about 250 kg subdivided into four to six experiment modules,
the apogee is typically between 250 and 300 lan. This corresponds to a free fall time of 6 to 7
minutes with residual accelerations of less than 10-4 go' The use of ·sounding rockets for
combustion experiments offers many additional advantages such as direct experiment
operation by the scientist using telescience, reduced safety and hazard requirements, short
recovery time and the possibility of late access (ref. 7).
Examples of European

micro~ravity

combustion research programs

This chapter summarizes brietly some of the European micro gravity research programs using
the above listed facilities. The emphasis is mainly put on new research topics.
Microgravity combustion experiments with gas phase t1ames is conducted during the
parabolic nights of the Caravelle aircraft by the group at the Laboratoire d'Aerothermique of
the CNRS at Meudon. Part of the investigation is devoted to the effects of gravity on
polyhedral t1ames. Propane-air premixed names are burner stabilized and tests are conducted
under normal gravity. reduced gravity and at 1.8 g during the pull-up period of the aircraft
Several theoretical results are verified on cellular tfames in the polyhedral configuration and
it is shown that gravity does have a stabilizing effect for a downward propagating t1aroe. On
average. it is observed that one facet of the polyhedron is lost at reduced gravity in those
contigurations where the number of facets are between 5 and 8 under normal gravity (ref. 8).
Another part of the research program focuses on the int1uence of gravity on laminar premixed
and diffusion gas names (refs. 9 and 10).
Another example of microgravity combustion experiment using the parabolic nights of the
Caravelle is the research program on high pressure droplet burning conducted at the CNRSLCSR at Orleans. A High Pressure Droplet Burning Facility has been developed for this
purpose. It allows the investigation of burning and vaporizing single droplets up to an ambient
pressure of 12 MPa. A powerful image analysis system is added to the facility. N-heptane and
methanol droplets undergoing pure vaporization or burning are investigated. Preliminary
results show that the pressure effect on the gasification process differs strongly depending on
the gasification regime and that the instantaneous gasification rate can he obtained hy the
lcchniqucs developed 1refs. 11. 12).
With the availability of the Bremen drop tower. new combustion experiments have started to
take advantage of the very low gravity levels provided by this facility. One recent research
program is developed by the team of the CNRS-LCPC in Poitiers. in collaboration with the
University of California, Berkeley (ref. 13). The global aim of the research is to study the
diffusion name combustion of gaseous, liquid and solid fuels in a non-buoyant low velocity.
nat plate boundary layer established in an oxidizing now. The research program is planned in
progressive stages. The forced now boundary layer tlame combustion produced by a gaseous
name injected through a porous plate is first studied in the Bremen Drop Tower. An
experimental apparatus has been developed and the first drops were realized in 1992.
Methane names were ignited under both normal gravity and micro gravity and the name
behaviour is recorded by CCD cameras and thermocouples. Several parameters have been
varied. Preliminary observations indicate that micro gravity names are wider and more
diffuse, and less t1ickering. The name temperature is lower in micro gravity (ref. 13). In
parallel. modelling activities devoted to similar problems are conducted at the Universidad
Politecnica de Madrid (ref. 14),
The Bremen Drop Tower allowed also the development of another international collaboration
on the topic of high pressure droplet evaporation between Gennan and Japanese teams (ref.
15).
Another example of new micro gravity combustion research in Europe is provided by the
future use of the Texus sounding rocket program by the team of the Polytechnic University of

22

Madrid. They developed the conceptual design and expected operational characteristics of a
multipurpose Microgravity Combustion Module for sounding rocket experiments. The same
tearn proposed also to carry out one particular experiment on flame spreading with forced
convection along the surface of a solid fuel at reduced gravity. It is proposed to use hollow
cylinders of PMMA samples of 8 mm external diameter and 4 mm internal diameter. Three
series of experiments are proposed including the int1uence of small now velocities at constant
ambient composition with parallel and cross now conditions. and the int1uence of oxygen
concentration. In parallel. a theoretical program will be developed and will include the search
of an analytical solution for name spreading under forced convection in all upwind or
opposed now cases and an approximate theory of the downwind name spreading processes.
This program is also conducted in collaboration with CISE. (Milano. Italy) and CNRJCNPM
(Milano. Italy) concerning the development of laser diagnostics for micro gravity combustion
applications.
A new European collaboration gro&ramQn Gravity Dependent Phenomena in Combustion
In 1990. ESA started to organize Expert Working Groups (EWG) in various domains of t1uids
and materials sciences in order to structure at the European level the corresponding
microgravity relevant research programs. by seeking strong complementarities between ( 1)
ground and space hased experimental activities (2) theoretical. numerical and experimental
approaches. and (3) basic and technologically relevant research objectives. Another objective
of the EWGs is [0 seek collaboration possibilities between ESA programs and those of the
Commission of the European Community (CEC). An EWG in combustion has also been
constituted. It is composed of the following individuals: Profs. K.N.e. Bray, N. Peters. A.
Lman. A. d'Alessio, Drs. M. Champion and 1. Gokalp (chairman). After several preliminary
meetings and workshops a research program on "Gravity Dependent Phenomena in
Combustion" has been put together and submitted to the Human Capital and Mobility
program of the CEe. The global structure of the program constructed along four tasks. and
which is currently under evaluation, is as follows:

Task I. Flame spread over liquid or solid surfaces
University of Madrid CA. Linan. S. Tarifa)
University of Naples (e. di Blasi)
C\"RS. Puilicrs tp. Jllulain. 1.:'1. MOSLJ

Task II. Flammability limits in gaseous premixtures
RTWH. Aachen (N. Peters)
University of Cambridge (B. Rogg. K.N.C. Bray)

Task Ill. Droplet Combustion
CNRS. Orleans (1. Gokalp. C. Chauveau)
University of Naples (P. Massoli, A. D'Alessio)
University of Madrid CA. Linan)

Task IV. Laser Diagnostics
University of Naples (P. Massoli. A. D'Alessio)
Milan (G. Zizak. F. Cignoli)
CNRS. Orleans (1. Gokaip, C. Chauveau)
CISE, Milan (I. Gianinoni)

C~M.

The construction of this collaborative program is based on the understanding that analysis of
gravity dependent phenomena in comiJustion necessitates both ground based studies and
space (or reduced gravity) experiments. Theore\ical studies are also an important pan in this

23

conducted with the aid of ESA and National Space Agencies. The reduced gravity
experiments will use parabolic nights of the Caravelle aircraft of CNES, the Bremen drop
tower. and the Texus sounding rockets. Theoretical and numerical work will be performed in
order to analyze and predict gravity effects on combustion.
In building this programme, the basic research relevance and the technological relevance of
the proposed studies are taken into account The elucidation of gravity effects on combustion
phenomena has important general basic consequences as combustion induced buoyancy is
always present on ground. The technological relevance of the programme appears through its
interest i) on tlammability limits of essentially hydrogen/air mixtures (Task II) which is the
fuel selected for the future high speed civil transport (the so called scramjet technology based
on supersonic combustion); ii) on droplet combustion (Task ill) as liquid fuels such as liquid
oxygen will power the next generation rocket motors (such as the Vulcain engine of the
launcher Ariane V) and iii) on tlame spread over solid and liquid surfaces (Task I) which
constitutes the basic mechanisms of flame propagation during fires. Finally, Task IV is of
importance for all combustion work as the development of laser diagnostics is today an
essential companion of combustion studies. The adaptation of laser diagnostics to space
conditions will benefit other applications (for example in medical sciences) through their
miniaturization and enhanced stability or user friendliness.
References
l. Dordain. J.J. and Lockwood, F.C. Combustion. in Fluid Sciences and M aterials Science
in Space. A European Pespective. H. U. Walter (ed.), Berlin: SpringIer-Verlag, 1987, pp.
291-309.
2. Combustion experiments during KC-135 parabolic flights. ESA SP-ll13. 1989. 69p.
3. Gokalp. I.. Microgravity News from ESA, vol. 3. no. 1. 1990, pp. 18-22.
4. Pletser. V. and Couffy. J.F. (eds), Microgravity experiments during parabolic flights
with Caravelle. ESA WPP-021. 1991. pp. 53-96.
5. Rath. H.J. and Dreyer, M.• Proceedings of the First European Symposium on Fluids in
Space. ESA SP-353. 1992, pp. 27-46.
6. The INTA Microgravity Combustion Laboratory. Appl. microgravity tech I. vol. 4. 1988.
pp216-217.
7. Summary Review of Sounding Rocket Experiments in Fluid Science and ~Iaterial
Sciences (prepared by O. Minster). ESA SP-1132. 1991. 371p.
R. Durox. D.. To appear in Twenty-Fourth International Symposium on Combustion. The
Combustion Institute. 1992.
9. Durox. D .. Baillot. F .. Scoutlaire. P. and Prud'homme. R.. Combustion and Flame. vol.
82. 1990. pp. 66-74.
10. Villermaux, E. and Durox. D .. Combustion Science and Technology, vol. 84. 1992, p.
279.
11. Chesneau. X .. Chauveau, C. and Gokalp. 1.. Proceedin~s of the First European
Symposium on Fluids in Space. ESA SP-353. 1992. pp. 407-418. '
12. Chauveau.
Chesneau, X. and Gokalp. I.. AIAA Paper no. 93-0824, to be presented
at the 31st Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit. January 11-14. 1993. Reno NY.
13. Bonneau. L.. Most. J.M .• Joulain, P. and Fernandez-Pello, A.C., AIAA Paper no. 930826. to be presented at the 31st Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit. January 11-14.
1993. Reno NV.
14. Crespo. A. and Hernandez, J., Microgravity sci. technol. vol. 4, 1991. p. 126
15. Nomura. H., Kono. M .. Sato. 1.. Marks. G .• Igleseder. H. and Rath. H.I., Microgravity
sci. technoJ. vol. 4. 1991, p. 12

c..

24

------

COMMENTS
Question (Howard O. Ross, NASA Lewis R esearch Cente r): (1) What types of laser diagnostics arc being
provided in ESA's microgravi ty com bustio n progra m ?
(2) Yo u showed a photograp h of fla me s prea d over a liq uid pool. Could you please describe the ESA
research in this area in a li lli e more de tai l?
Answer:
(1) Several groups in Europe arc develop ing lase r d iagnost ics relevant for microgravity combustion. Previous
studies at the istitute Moto ri - CNR in Nap les, It a ly, h ave shown that the velocity. diameter and temperature
of homogeneous droplets can be obtained by m easuring the light scattered at two timely a ngles. These
techniq ues are presently extended to non-ho mogeneous droplets by developing a theoretical model for the
light-scattering by droplets with a rad ial g rad ie nt of the refractin! index to determine the temperature and
s pecies proriles inside mullicomponenl droplets.
In parallel, a differential interferomete r to determine the temperature distrihution around a burning droplet
is being developcd at ZARM, Uni\·ersily of Bremen, Germany.
The Research Institute on Propulsion and Energetics of CNR in collaboration with CISE, both in Milan ,
Italy, arc developing a planar laser induced fluorescence system for combustion diagnostics in microgravity.
A multi-purpose PUF system based on a 2-0 solid state array scnsor is under development. The objective is
to investigate the ~ tructure of diffusion Ilames by measuring molecular distributions. The simultaneous
detection of the reso nant scattering will give indication of the presence of particulate matter such as soot
and/or li4Uid droplets. Also, temperature measurements will be obtained by exploiting the anomalous
nuorescence of pyrene. A PUF system is also under developmcnt at ZARM. University of Bremen, with the
support of the German space agency. Thc system is based on a tunable narrow band excimer laser, a sheetforming optical device and an intensificd digita l high-speed CCO camera.
(2) An cxperimental program on Ihc simulation of pool /ires wilh a gas flame stabili zed above n porous
burner of 7-cm in diameter is in progress at thc LCPC-CNRS in Poiters in collaboration with LaboralOire
d'Aerothermique in i\leudon. The ZARM drop tower and the parabolic nights of the Caravellc arc used for
this purpose. The inlluence of macrogravity on the structure of simulated pool lires is also investigated in a
centrifuge; LOA nH.:asureIl1enls ha\'e already been performed in this last case. III parallel. a Ilumerical
modeling study of flame spread (l\'cr liquid fuels is being conduct~J at the Liniversity of aples. The
objectives of this study arc: (a) lile simulation and analysis, by means of a constant property model, of the
crfccts of gravity level on Ilame spread over sub-Ilash liquid fuels: (b) the de\·clopment of varinble property
gas-phase models (full Navier- Stokes e4 uations) and simulation of thc effects of hot-gas expansions; and (c)
the simu lation and analysis of the effects of slow forced-llow conditions on the pulsating nnme spread and
cxtinction mechanisms.

25

------~----

) - - - - - --

JAPAN'S MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION SCIENCE PROGRAM
Jun'ichi Sato
Research Institute
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co., Ltd.
Tokyo,Japan

Introduction
Most of energy used by us is generated by combustion of fuels.
On the
other hand, combustion is responsible for contamination of our living
earth.
Combustion, also, gives us damage to our life as fire or
explosion accidents.
Therefore, clean and safe combustion is now
eagerly required. Knowledge of the combustion process in combustors is
needed to achieve proper designs that have stable operation, high
efficiency, and low emission levels.
However, current understanding on
combust i on is far from complete.
Especially, there is few useful
informat i on on practical liquid and solid particle cloud combustion.
Studies on combustion process under microgravity condition will provide
many informations for basic questions related to combustors.
In Japan, origin of the microgravity combustion was Kumagai's droplet
combustion conducted about 35 years ago (ref. 1), and until now, most of
studies on the microgravity combustion has been conducted for the
droplet combustion. Recently, many types of studies on the microgravity
combustion have been planed, started, and carried out by using the
droptowers. They are droplet arrays, sprays, solid, coal particle
cloud, and premixed gas combustion studies.
At last year, the biggest dropshaft facility in the world for the
microgravity science was opened at Hokkaido.
It produces 10 second of
good quality microgravity field. Also, 4.5 second dropshaft facility is
now under constructed and will be opened in 1994.
The new sounding
rocket operation was started from this year.
Preparation of a space
station combustion experiments has been started also from this year.
Increasing opportuni ty for get ting good microgravi ty field
has
stimulated recent microgravi ty combustion studies in Japan.
The
combustion scientists who do and hope to do the microgravity combustion
have made the consortium, and it discusses with the government agencies
on the governmental support microgravity combustion programs.
This presentation describes the Japanese microgravity facilities,
recent research activities, and planed future activities.

Microgravity Facilities
Droptowers: About six small droptowers of 5 - 20 m have been used for
combustion research at universities and companies.
Up to now, most of

Preceding Page Blank
27

micr o grav i ty com bu sti on s t u d ies h a ve be e n do n e by usin g th ese
dro ptowe rs .
From October 1991, Japan Microgravi ty Center (JAMIC) opened its
commercial operations at Kamisunagawa, Hokkaido (s e e Fig. 1).
Cae~bilities of JAMIC facility are 10 second of free
fall duration,
10
g of microgravity level, 8 g of maximum deceleration level, 1000
kg of maximum payload weight, and 870 x 870 x 918 rom of experimental
equipment mounting capacity.
The other big dropshaft facility is now under constructed at
prefecture and will be ope~5d in 1994.
Its capabilities are
of free fall duration, 10
g of microgravity level, 10 g
deceleration level, 650 kg of maximum payload weight, and 0.7
x 0.8m length of experimental equipment mounting capacity.

Toki, Gifu
4.5 second
of maximum
m diameter

Parabolic flights: A small jet airplane named MU-300 is employed for the
parabolic !~ight.
Its capabilities are about 20 second of microgravity
field, 10
g of microgravity level, and two 700 x 450 x 900 mm
experimental rack.
Up to now, there has been no combustion experiments
by using the parabolic flight.

Sounding rockets: A new sounding rocket named TR-1A h~.l been operated
from 1991. The microgravity level and duration are 10
g and about 6
minute.
The maximum payload is 750 kg and experimental equipment
mounting capacity is 770 mm diameter x 2380 rom length.
For the
combustion experiments, it can be used after 1995.
Preparation of TRlA combustion experiments will be started from next year.

Space station Japan module: Preparation of microgravity Experiments in
the space station "Freedom" has been started at this year.
Combustion
is planed as one of the space station microgravity experiments.

Recent research activities
Droplet and spray combustion: Effects of fuel nature on the burning
process have been studied by using a free droplet method at atmospheric
pressure by Hara and Kumagai (ref. 2).
From this research, it has been
found that the quasi-steady theory of droplet combustion cannot be
applied for four kinds alkane fuel from n-heptane to n-decane.
The other droplet combustion studies are for the high pressure
evaporation and combustion.
For the evaporation, experiments have been
done up to the ambient pressure of 5 MFa by Nomura et al (ref. 3). and
the data were compared wi th results obtained d t normal gravity
condition.
This experiments have been carried out by using 5 second
droptower of University of Bremen, Germany, as a collaborative research.
Quite different evaporation behavior compared with that of under normal
gravity was observed at subcritical and supercritical condition.

28

Evaporation constant and evaporation
various conditions.

life time

were

obtained

for

the

Effects of oxygen concentration have been studied experimentally on the
burning life time and on the carbon zone formation behavior around the
droplet by Niwa et al. (ref. 4). The burning life time takes minimum at
the critical pressure of fuel also in the low oxygen concentration.
Extinction diameter of a burning droplet was predicted theoretically by
Ni ioka et al. (refs. 5 and 6).
For the prediction, they used the
extinction data of diffusion flame established in a stagnation flow on a
liquid fuel and the analogy between its diffusion flame and the flame
surrounding a liquid droplet.
The droplet diameter at extinction was
found to decrease rapidly wi th pressure, take minimum, and then
increase.
Multi-components fuel problems have been studied experimentally by using
a two-components fuel of n-heptane and n-hexadecane by Mikami et al.
(ref. 7).
This research used the NASA LeRC 2.2 second droptower as a
collaborative research. Three-stage burning of the binary fuel droplets
is observed, and the onset time of the second stage is compared with the
previous theoretical predictions.
For the ignition, experimental studies are being carried out. Numerical
studies have been done by Tsukamoto et al. (ref. 8), and the results
will be compared with the experiments.
Experimental studies on ignition and combustion of droplets array have
been started from this year. Also, studies on generation of homogeneous
droplet cloud under microgravity have been started for preparation of
the spray combustion research in the space station.

Others: Ignition of premixed gas by a hot surface has been studied
experimentally and theoretically by Nagata et al. (ref. 9 ) .
Ign i tion
delay under microgravity is shorter than that under normal gravity.
Fire spreading behavior over a paper honeycomb has been studied by Itoh
et al. (ref. 10), and the effects of fire spreading direction, oxygen
concentration,
and honeycomb cell size were obtained and compared with
that of under normal gravity.
The f ire spreading velocity does not
depend on the honeycomb cell size under microgravity.
Flame propagation behavior through the coal particle
have been
studied by using 10 second dropshaft to study the coal gasification
process by Sato and Itoh.
Nearly homogeneous particle cloud was
obtained and spherical flame propagation was observed.
Demonstration experiments of 10 second dropshaft were conducted by some
combustion experiments, such as candle burning, paper burning, string
burning, and large solid fuel burning by Itoh et al. The candle did not
extinguish during 10 second of microgravi ty.
These studies will be
continued as mi crogravity combustion science.

29
" -- - -

~-

--

-- --

~

- -

- --

Future research activities
Pre parat i o n of s r a c e statio n c ombu st i o n experime nt s has been started
from t h i s fis ca l y ea r .
Base d on t h e d i scuss i o n in t h e J a p anese
microgra vity combusti on c onsortium , s pray c ombus ti o n exp eriments are
planed to do in t h e s pac e .
Deta ils o f experiments are b e ing di s c uss ed
and some experiment al preparations wi l l be sta r t e d in thi s year.
Two large governmental re search pro grams on microgravity combustion
science by using 10 second dropshaft are planed for five years from next
year to keep clean the earth by the fundamental combustion science point
of view. This year is preparation for the next year.
One program will
be conducted as international research collaboration.
Details how to
conduct these have been started to be discussed and will also be
discussed with the governmental agencies concerning microgravity
combustion science in the world. In the Japanese side, many combustion
scientists will participate these research programs

Concluding Remarks
Up to now, most of the research budget for microgravity science in Japan
has been used for material science.
But recently, the research budget
for combustion is increased and then Japan IS microgravi ty combustion
science programs are being increased remarkably. Furthermore, 10 second
dropshaft facility was opened in Japan at last year.
Many Japanese
combustion scientists will join the microgravi ty programs in the near
futur e.
For the combustion scientist, it is required to explore the combustion
phenomena in order to solve the emission problems from the combustors.
Microgravity field is suitable for the fundamental combustion research.
However, opportunity to use a good quality microgravity fi eld of over 3
second is not so much for many combustion scientists because of the
limited number of big facilities.
Therefore, more effective use of the
limited number of big facilit ies is important and should be discus sed.

References
1. Kumagai, S. and Isoda, H.: Combustion of Fuel Droplets in a Falling
Chamber, Sixth Symposium (International) on Combustion, 1957,
pp. 726-731.

2. Hara, H. and Kumagai, S.: Studies on free droplet combustion under
microgravity, 28th Symposium (Japanese Section) on Combustion, 1990,
pp. 170-172.

3. Nomura, H., Marks, G., Iglseder, H., Rath, H. J., Sato, J., and
Kono, M.: Effects of the natural convection on fuel droplet
evaporation, Microgravity Science and Technology, Vol. 4, 1991,
pp. 124-126.

30

4. Niwa, M., Mikami, M., Kono, M., Tsue, M., and Sato , J.: Effects of
pre s s u r e and oxygen concentration o n burning of fuel droplets under
mi crogr avity condition, 28th Sympos ium (Japanese Section) on
Combus ti on, 1990, pp. 167- 168.
5. Niioka, T . , Hasegawa, S . , tsukamo t o , T., and Sato, J.: Diffusion
flame exti n ction o f l i quid fuel a t elevated pressures, Combustion a nd
Flame , Vol. 86, 1991, pp. 171-1 78 .
6. Hiraiwa, T. , Ono, N., and Niiok a, T: High-pressure combustion
character i s tic s of liquid fuel i n the stagnation point flow, Abstract
book of 24th Sympos i um (I nternat i onal) on Combustion, 1992, p. 15.
7. Mikami, M., Ko no , M., Sato , J ., Die trich, D. L., and Williams, F. A.:
Combustion of mi sc i ble bi nary- f ue l droplets at high pressure under
microgravi t y , Abstrac t book of 24 th Symposium (International ) on
Combustion, 1 99 2 , p . 22 9 . (to app ear in Combustion Science and
Technology)
8. Tsukamoto , T . , Okada , H., and Niioka, T.: Numerical analysis on fuel
droplet ignit i o n under high pre ss ures, 29th Symposium (Japanese
Section) on Co mbustion , 199 1 , pp. 385-387.
9 . Nagata, H., I s h i i , K., Tomio k a , S., Sato, J., and Kono, M.: Ignition
delay of premixe d gases und er mi c rogravity conditions, Microgravity
Science and Te chnol o gy , Vol . 4, 1991, pp. 117-118.
10. Itoh, K., Fu ji ta, 0 ., and Ito h , H.: Observation of fire spreading
over p o r o u s mater i a l s u nder microgravity, 29th Symposium (Japanese
Section) on Combus ti o n , 1991, pp. 16-18.

31

I

Thruster N
ozzlo

DROP SHAFT
EXPERIMENTAL CENTER
BUILDING

Air Rese rvo ir
CAPSULE

El ectromagne tic
Guide (Upper)

GUIDE

Di sconnection
Magnet

BRAKE FI NS

Elec trom Jl OUc
ag
Bearing (Upper)
TOTAL DEPTH
710m

Inner Capsu l e

Electl"
uuagne tic
Bearing (Lower)

User Rac k
AIR DAMPER

Brake Fin

/' BRAKING DEVICE

Shock Absorber

BRAKING ZONE

Bus M
odule
Utility Units

SHOCK
AB SO RBING
MATERI AL

El ect.omagne ti c Guide
Electromagnetic
(Lower)
(Lowe.)

Figure 1.-Sche matic of JAMIe 10 second dropshaft..
dropshaft

l _
--- - "

-- ._-- - - - -

--

,-----

------- -

- - - - - - - -- - -

SESSION B - PLENARY SESSION

(Chair, Kurt Sacksteder)

Preceding Page Blank

- , j

I
CAPABILITIES AND CONSTRAINTS OF TYPICAL SPACE
FLIGHT HARDWARE
John M. Koudelka
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

Introduction
The Space Experiments Division is in the business of performing
ground based low gravity testing and designing experiment
hardware for space flight on the space Shuttle and in the future,
Space Station Freedom. As witnessed in combustion work, the
reduction of gravity brings forward previously negligible
processes and parameters.
In a similar manner, the design of
experiments for microgravity operation aboard the Space Shuttle
must consider parameters that are often not factors for
laboratory hardware.
Accommodations .
One of the first requirements that needs to be defined is the
size selection for Shuttle accommodations. This selection is
mostly driven by experiment requirements and manifest
availability. The accommodations aboard Shuttle fall into two
categories, that is habitable areas and the cargo bay.
Obviously, the habitable areas permit crew interaction (hands on
options) with the experiment.
Cargo bay experiments are
required to be more automated. Also, the safety requirements
associated with crew presence are not a concern in the cargo bay.
The Space Shuttle provides several accommodations within the
habitable area.
options consist of the Middeck area and the
Space lab (Spacehab is future option). Each area has its
limitations and advantages. A summary of the resources available
in each area is provided in Table 1.
Middeck
The Middeck area is the crews' living space. The prime
experiment accommodation is in the place of middeck stowage
lockers. The lockers are used mainly for Shuttle and crew
stowage items but based upon the mission, several of the locker
spaces are available for experiment hardware. The hardware can
be designed to fit into a stowage container which provides
0.56 m3 of volume and 24 kg weight carrying capacity.

35

Additional volume and weight is accommodated by interfacing in
place of the stowage container(s). Experiment hardware can
occupy the space of two middeck stowage lockers structurally
and several lockers if not structurally connected. The more
space that is allocated for a single experiment, however
reduces the opportunities for flight.
The services provided to
an experiment in the middeck locker area are basic (namely;
space, low power a nd crew interaction). The middeck l ocker
area does provide ample flight opportunities since it is an
integral section of the Shuttle. Experiments slated f or
Middeck opportunities are considered as secondary pay l oads
which are evaluated for each Shuttle flight.
The Middeck area can also provide accommodations in a Middeck
Ac c ommodati o n s Rack (MAR) . This rack is mounted along port
s ide i n t h e Middeck.
I t provides additional services such as
coo ling, i ncreased volume (0.42 m3 ) and increased weight. The
MAR has n ot b een y et integrated into a Shutt l e for fl i ght.
Space l a b
The Space l ab modu l e provides a complete l a boratory setting fo r
condu c ting e xperime n ts . The modu l e consi s t s of t we lve
equipme nt rack s a n d addit i onal mount i ng locati ons a lon g the
floor for e xp e r i ment h ardware . A s umma ry of the r ack feat u r e s
a re l isted i n Tab l e 1.
The Space la b r acks p r ovi de a variety o f r esources to the
experimenter. The Spacel a b r a ck ser vi ces c l o s e ly r esemb l e the
services associated with normal labor ator i es . Along with the
larger volume and wei ght capacity avail a ble compared t o t h e
Middeck accommodations, the rack has provisions for the rma l
control (avionics air loop or liquid cooling lo op), and command
and data management.
Another provision for experiment operation within the Spacelab
is a glovebox facility.
The glovebox is a sealed work a rea for
the performance of s mall experiments. The glovebox e xper i me nts
are manifested as stowage items and operated in the confines of
the glovebox.
The facility provides a level of containment
that permits operations using small quantities of toxic,
irritant or potentially harmful materials.
A small version of the Space lab is the Spacehab. The Spacehab
is being developed to provide either 61 lockers (Middeck t~e)
or 41 lockers with 2 racks. A Spacehab rack provides 1.2 m of
volume (two areas of 2.03m x .48m x .56 m) and is able to
support 567 kg of payload. Other services provided by the
Spacehab rack is similar to those provided by the Spacelab
rack. The Spacehab is a new Shuttle accommodation that is yet
to be flown.

36

-

-

-

1

Crew operation and observations of experiments is available to
all accommodations within the habitable areas of the Shuttle.
The rack accommodations generally offer the most
resources/services to the experimenter but the lockers have the
greatest flight opportunities.
The other accommodation area for microgravity experiments
(secondary payloads) is in the Shuttle cargo bay. Two of the
accommodations are the Getaway special (GAS) Canister and as a
payload on the Mission Peculiar Experiment Support structure
(MPESS).
GAS CAN
The GAS can is a cylindrical pressure vessel that can house up
to a 90 kg experiment parload. The GAS can provides the
simple services of 0.14 m sealed volume and activation
control. The GAS can being basic simplifies the integration
and design work for the experimenter. The GAS cans are
generally manifested as ballast on the Shuttle so flight
opportunities are determined relatively late in the processing
flow, but are often.
MPESS
Two MPESS's have been connected to form the united states
Microgravity Payload (USMP). A descr"iption of the payload
accommodations on USMPare described in Table 1. The USMP
accommodation has resources similar to the spacelab. It only
lacks the crew interaction.
The cargo bay accommodations lack the crew interaction provided
within the habitable areas of the Shuttle. The loss of this
feature requires the experiments to be more automated. For USMP
payloads, interactive control is available through the command
and data management system (CDMS).
The accommodations described are the common ones aboard the
Shuttle. For all these accommodations, the experimenter timeline is limited to the length of the Shuttle mission which is
generally about five to ten days (extended duration of 13 days
has been aChieved) and sharing of resources among experimenters.
The time-line will be expanded with the future use of Space
station Freedom (SSF). Rack accommodations are being developed
for SSF.
HARDWARE DESIGN
The experiment hardware design gets its origins from the
laboratory rigs developed in performing 1-g tests. The process
to get to a flight experiment would seem to be one of packaging.
Requirements based on Shuttle safety and environment, however
d oes not allow us to just package components.
Parameters are
37

-------_

..

-

added or more importance is placed on parameters as the hardware
is transitioned to the Shuttle.
MATERIAL SELECTION
Today, health concerns from mater i als are addressed in their
uses in the laboratories. Mater i al Safety Data Sheets (MSDS)
p r ovide guidelines for safe use of materials and protective
equipment necessary when handling certain mater i als.
The
measures t aken on the groun d, however, are n ot always 'available
on the Shuttle, therefore extra p r ecautions must b e t a ken. Al l
materials used on the space flight hardware must be e v aluated
for its acceptabi l ity.
Metallic materials are evaluated f or their r esis t a n ce to
corrosion and cont amination , res is tance to s t r ess corros i o n
cracking, compatibility with oxygen and flu i d systems,
strength , a n d fat i gue e ndu r a n ce. Along wi t h the me tal lic
material selected , attenti on must be pa id to t h e c oatings
applied to the metals.
Non- meta ll ic mater i als generally come under the maj o rity o f the
scrutiny. The ma j or con cerns for non-me t al l ics are
fl ammab ility and toxi c ity.
Both of t hes e are o f less c o ncern
f o r experiments loca ted in the cargo bay (depen ding on
e xperiment p rovided environment). Common plastics, tape s and
adh esives u sed in the l ab a re us uall y not acc eptable for s pace
f light us e.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
The har dware components must be evaluated for their ability to
o p era t e and s urvive the environment imposed by a Shutt le flight
(launch, orbit and landing). An area of concern for components
is the a bilit y to s urvive the launch random vibration l o ads.
The vibr ation loads are dependent upon the accommodation but
gene rally range up to 12 g's [rms] (at the interface with the
expe rime nt; might be larger at component due to amplification).
I n order t o d ea l with the vibration environment, some
comp onents r e quire vi br a tion isolation, modifications for
v ibration r es i stance , o r SUbs tituti on.
The thermal environme nt of the Shuttle is also a concern for
the experiments in the cargo bay. The cargo bay temperatures
exceed the operating limitations of most commercial electronics
and the temperatures affect experiment gases and liquids (phase
change, pressure changes).
Due to the elimination of buoyancy
driven convection flows in the microgravity environment, even
the shirt sleeve environment of the manned areas causes thermal
problems. With the lack of convection, some experiments design
in forced convective flows to keep hardware within operating
limits and below Shuttle temperature limits (touch temperature
limit of 45°C). The thermal concerns also direct component

38

I
I

selection t o be based upon power consumption.
An obvious aspect of space flight that is sometimes overlooked

in evaluating component acceptability is gravity dependency.
Some mechanisms rely on gravity for proper or safe operation.
An example of this is the ejection of a storage disk. The
mechanism consisted of a spring load to overcome frictional
drag due to the weight of the storage disk. without the
gravity force, the spring load propelled the storage disk into
the Shuttle cabin area.
These factors and others make the transition to space flight
hardware more than a packaging task. They also work to add
constraints to the hardware.
OPERAT IONS
Even though s ome of the Shuttle accommodations resemble
laboratories in terms of services provided, they do not i n terms
of operations. All experiment operations and crew interactions
with hardware are controlled by the Shuttle safety requirements.
Safety has to be at the center of hardware design and hardware
operations. Experiment hardware or operation shall not damage or
impair the Shuttle nor harm the crew.
This requirement has far reaching implications in the hardware
design and operation. simple operations performed on the ground
such as sample change out are complicated in space. The
procedures for the sample change out must consider items such as
sharp edges, surface temperatures, release of hazardous materials
(combustion gases) or electrical shock. The experiment procedure
during a space flight must have controls to prevent any of the
possible unsaf e conditions before it would be approved for
performance. operation of the experiment requires extra steps
and extra hardware features to aid the crew in the weightless
environment.
The automated operation of experiments are still subjected to the
requirement of safe operations.
For those type of experiments,
electrical and software protection are required.

39

CONCLUSION

The accommodations for experiments provide space up to 1.75 m3
and structural capacity of 300 kg. The services usually
available in ground based laboratories such as power, cooling,
data management can be found within the Shuttle accommodations.
The experimenter receives the services necessary to conduct their
experiment. Space flight safety and environmental requirements
constrain the design of the experiments.
Factors such as
material acceptability, vibration survival and non hazardous
operations at times eliminate experiment components or
operational flexibility.

40

----------

TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF SPACE SHUTTLE / SPACE STATION ACCOMODATION RESOURCES
MIDDECK
LOCKER
SINGLE

LOCKER
DOUBLE

RACK
SINGLE

RACK
DOUBLE

0.066 m)
mJ
.46x.27x.52m

0.13 m)
mJ
.46x . 55x.52m
. 46x

0.42 m)
0 . 42 mJ
. 44x1.0x . 61m
44x1.0x.61m
.44x.71x.4 0m
0m

o. B3 m)
0.B3 m3

WEIGHT
(maximum)

29 kg

45 kg

29 0 kg
290

580 kg

Stowage
Depen dent

POWER

28 VDC
5 amp max
cont
1 1 0 W cant .

2 8 VDC
28
5 amp max
110 W cant.
cont.

28 VDC
35 amp l imited
a mp limited

28 VDC
35 amp limited
35
lim i ted

&
VDe
5, 12 & 24 VDC

PRESSURE

101. 3 kPa
10 1.

101. 3 kPa

101. 3 kPa

1 01. 3 kPa
0 1.3

100.5 kPa

OXYGEN
OXYGEN

25 . 9
25.9 %

25.9%

21. 7%

21. 7%

2 1. 7%
7%

TEMPERATURE

18-35 °c

18-35 °C

10-35 °c

10-35 °c

18-35 °c

THERMAL CONTROL

Cabin Air

Cabin Air

Avionics Air
Liquid cooling
L i quid

Avionics Air
Liquid cooling

Cabin Air

COMMAND &
DATA MANAGEMENT

NONE

NONE

AVAILABLE*

AVAILABLE*

NONE

PHOTOGRAPHIC

AVAILABLE
video, still

AVAILABLE
video, still

AVAILABLE
video, still

AVAILABLE
video, still

AVAILABLE
video, still

EXAMPLE

Space
Acceleration
Measurement
System

Solid Surface
Combustion
Experiment
(one module)

RESOURCE
VOLUME

SPACELAB

.8Bxl.Ox.61m
.8Bx1.0x.61m
. 88x . 71x.40m
7 1x.40m

GLOVE BOX
BOX
J
0.025 m1
.48x.24x .21m
.48x.24x.21m

20W, 18W & 60W

ENVIRONMENTAL
CONDITIONS

.p.
~

*

Surface Tension
Smoldering
Driven Convection Combustion
Experiment
in
Microgravity

Commanding, monitoring, recording, processing & transmitting

TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF SPACE SHUTTLE / SPACE STATION ACCOMODATION RESOURCES
RESOURCE

GETAWAY SPECIAL
CANISTER

(GAS)

UNITED STATES
MICROGRAVITY PAYLOAD

SPACE STATION
FREEDOM

VOLUME

0.14 m3
.50 dia x .72 m

1.75 m
1. 75 m3
.85x2.0x1.0m

1.1 m3

WEIGHT
(maximum)

90 kg

308 kg

700 kg

POWER

Experiment supplied

28 VDC
470 W (865 W peak)

120 VDC

PRESSURE

Experiment specific
normally 101.3 kPa

Zero
unless experiment provided

70 - 101. 3 kPa

OXYGEN

Experiment specific

None

TEMPERATURE

-100 to 40°C

-157 to 144°C

20 - 30°C

THERMAL CONTROL

Passive
(Insulation)

Coldplate Available

Avionics Air
Water Cooling

COMMAND &
DATA MANAGEMENT

NONE

AVAILABLE·

AVAILABLE·

PHOTOGRAPHIC

NONE

NONE

EXAMPLE

POOL BOILING EXPERIMENT

ISOTHERMAL DENDRITIC
GROWTH EXPERIMENT

ENVIRONMENTAL
CONDITIONS
+:-.
N

• Commanding, monitoring, recording, processing & transmitting

21%

References:
1. NSTS 21000-IDD-MDK Shuttle/Pay load Interface Definition
Document for Middeck Accommodations
2. SLP / 2104 Spacelab Accommodations Handbook
3. GET AWAY SPECIAL (GAS) Small Self-Contained Payloads
Experimenter Handbo ok
4. MSFC-HDBK-527 / JSC 09604 Materials Selection List fo r Space
Hardware Systems
5. SPACEHAB User's Handbook
Douglas

January 1991 prepared by McDonnell

•

43

...

__

._- - - - - --

CAPABILITIES AND CONSTRAINTS OF NASA'S GROUND-BASED
REDUCED GRAVITY FACILITIES
Jack Lekan, Eric S. Neumann, and Raymond G. Sotos
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, O hio 44135

Introduction
The ground-based reduced gravity facilities of NASA have been utilized to support numerous
investigations addressing various processes and phenomena in several diSciplines for the past 30 years.
These facilities, which include drop towers, drop tubes, aircraft, and sounding rockets are able to
provide a low gravity environment (gravitational levels that range from ID-2g to lO-6g> by creating a
free fall or semHree fall condition where the force of gravity on an experiment is offset by its linear
acceleration during the "fall" (drop or parabola). The low gravity condition obtained on the ground is
the same as that of an orbiting spacecraft which is in a state of perpetual free fall. Figure 1
summarizes the gravitational levels and associated duration times associated with the full spectrum of
reduced gravity facilities including spaced-based facilities. Even though ground-based facilities offer
a relatively short experiment time, this available test time has been found to be sufficient to advance
the scientific understanding of many phenomena and to provide meaningful hardware tests during the
flight experiment development process. Also, since experiments can be quickly repeated in these
facilities, multistep phenomena that have longer characteristic times associated with them can
sometimes be examined in a step-by-step process. There is a large body of literature which has
reported the study results achieved through using reduced-gravity data obtained from the facilities.
Over the past several years these ground-based facilities have grown in their importance, particularly
in the vital role they play in the support of research programs sponsored by the Microgravity Science
and Applications Division (MSAD) of the NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. These
facilities support the development of long duration space flight experiments aboard the Space Shuttles
and eventually Space Station Freedom. The resources required to execute space-based experiments
require thorough scientific justification and proven technological feaSibility. Many of these
requirements can be met in ground-based facilities. Drop towers and aircraft are employed to perform
precursor tests to define space experiment science requirements and conceptual designs, perform tests for
space experiment technology development and verification and to also provide baseline normal and
reduced gravity data. The NASA facilities have enhanced the success and value of space experiments
to such an extent, that when appropriate, their utilization is a prerequisite prior to flight. The
facilities are also utilized for the execution of ground-based science programs. The requirements of
these investigations can be fully met in the facilities and thus avoid the need for longer duration
flight experiments.
While the value of the NASA ground-based reduced gravity facilities is clear, that value is enhanced
by considering the capabilities and characteristics of each facility and selecting the one best suited for
a particular series of experiments. This document will focus on the capabilities of the facilities located
at the Lewis Research Center (LeRC) in Cleveland, Ohio which include a 2.2 Second Drop Tower, the
Zero-Gravity Research Facility, and a model 2S Learjet. The capabilities of the KC-13S aircraft of the
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC ) in Houston, Texas will also be presented.

Preceding Page Blank
45

Background
The initial low gravity test activities at LeRC focused on testing to enable the development of
technologies and systems for space power and propulsion. Fundamental studies were performed to gain
an understanding of fluids under reduced gravity conditions. These studies allowed NASA to develop
on-orbit fluid management and handling functions including storage, conditioning, and transfer with a
variety of liquids, gases, and supercritical flu id s. Along with addressing the needs of propellant
systems, smaller studies w ere initiated in other a reas such as combustion, including fire safety.
Through a large number of tests performed in the LeRC facilities in the 1960's and 1970's, including a
progression from the Aerobee sounding rocket to an AJ-2 airplane to the 2.2 Second Drop Tower and
finally the Zero-Gravity Research Facility, our understanding of many low gravity processes was
greatly enhanced. During the late 1970's and early 1980's ground-based reduced gravity research
declined. This reduction w as due to the fact tha t the many critical enabling low gravity technologies
had been successfully developed and implemented and some experimentation had moved to space as
components of the Apollo and Skylab programs.
Reduced gravity or microgravity research ( a term synono mosly used w ith research activities conducted
at less than normal earth gravity) was reborn with the new era of the Space Shu ttle and plans fo r the
Space Station. NASA's MSAD program developed and grew since a restructuring in 1978. The MSAD
program now sponsors over 115 researchers in several disciplines. The large growth in the MSAD
program has been paralleled by an explosive growth in the number of programs, testing, and experiment
complexity in ground-based facilities.
Facility Descriptions
The 2.2 Second Drop Tower, d ue to its relatively simple mode of operation and associated low cost, is
the most heavily utilized facility as it now routinely supports over 1000 test drops per year. The Drop
Tower, while only providing a test time of 2.2 seconds, does represent an easy and timely method of
acquiring low gravity data. A schematic of this facility is shown in Figure 2. The components of the
Drop Tower include a shop for experiment build-up, integration and testing, several small laboratories
for experiment preparation and normal gravity testing, an electronics support area, and an eight story
tower in which is contained the drop area.
Since experiment packages are dropped under normal atmospheric conditions, air drag on the package is
minimized by enclosing it in a drag shield which has a high rate of weight to frontal area and a low
drag coefficient The drag shield/experiment assembly is hoisted to the top of the drop area where the
necessary electrical connections are made. The entire package is then suspended by a highly stressed
music wire which is attached to the release system. A drop is initiated by the pressurization of an air
cylinder which drives a hard steel knife against the wire which is backed by an anvil. The resulting
notch causes the wire to fail and the drag shield and experiment package are smoothly released into
free fall. Accelerations of approximately 10.5 g are obtained as the experiment falls freely a distance
of 20 centimeters within the drag shield while the whole assembly falls from a height of 27 m. The
only external force acting on the freely falling experiment is the air drag associated with the relative
motion of the experiment within the enclosure of the drag shield. A drop is terminated when the drag
shield assembly impacts a 2.1 m deep rectangular container that is filled with sand. The sand is
aerated prior to a drop to help reduce deceleration levels. The deceleration rate is controlled by
selectively varying the tips of three 1.9 m long aluminum spikes that are mounted on the bottom of the
drag shield. At the time of impact of the spikes with the sand, the experiment package has traversed
the available vertical distance within the drag shield and is resting on the floor of the drag shield.
The deceleration levels at impact vary from approximately 40 to 100 g's for several milliseconds.
Precautions taken during design, coupled with various cushioning foams permit the utilization of many
off-the-shelf electronic items including video cameras, low-power lasers, light bulbs, and data
acquisition and control systems. For sensitive hardware such as optical diagnostics which require

46

decelerations of no more than 40 g's, a shock absorption system has been successfully employed to meet
these requirements.
A large variety of experiment packages or "drop rigs" with differing capabilities have been tested in
the Drop Tower. Hardware provided by investigators is integrated into a rectangular aluminum frame
to form the experiment package. Experiment hardware weight is limited to 140 kg. The frame or drop
bus has varied over the years according to the experiment needs. The current "standard" frame is 81em
high, 91cm long, and 40 em deep. Standard frames need not be utilized however. Examples of two
experiment packages are shown in Figures 3 and 4. The Laser Diagnostics rig (Figure 3) represents the
most recent and sophisticated experiment package. For the purpose of clearly showing the
experimental hardware, the supporting framework was removed. Figure 4 shows a rig utilized for
premixed gas combustion. The rig is in the partially assembled drag shield undergoing final
preparations prior to a drop test.
Experiment power is provided by onboard battery packs which are generally 28 VOC. A 110 VAC
power cord has been dropped along with the package for two experiments. Data is acquired by highspeed motion picture cameras supplied by NASA with framing rates up to 1000 frames per second and
also by a variety of video cameras. The video signal can be recorded onboard or transmitted to a remote
recorder via a fiber optic cable that can be dropped with the experiment. Onboard data acquisition and
control systems are also employed to record data supplied by instrumentation such as thermocouples,
pressure transducers, and flow meters. The data acquisition and control system is supplied by NASA in
many instances. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the Drop Tower operations.
The Zero Gravity Research Facility when compared to the Drop Tower represents an expansion in
research capabilities and and in some instances experiment sophistication. Microgravity test time is
increased to 5.18 seconds while experiment size and weight can be increased considerably and new
experiment features are added. A schematic diagram of the facility is shown in Figure 5. The abovegrade portion of this unique facility, which is a registered U.s. national landmark, consists of
mechanical and electronics shop areas for experimental build-up, integration, and testing, a class
10000 clean room, shop offices, a control room for drop operations, and the attendant mechanical and
electrical systems. A test chamber shaft, deceleration system, and support systems comprise the belowgrade portion of the facility.
The shaft component of the facility, which extends 155 m belo w-grade elevation, consists of a .45 m
thick unreinforced concrete casing with an inside diameter of 8.7 m in which is housed a 6.1 m diameter
steel walled vacuum chamber which is 145 m deep. Unlike the Drop Tower, aerodynamic drag on the
free-falling experiment vehicle is reduced to less than 10-5 g's by evacuating the vacuum chamber to a
pressure of 10-2 torr. A multiple staged vacuum pumping system is capable of evacuating the chamber
to the desired drop pressure in one hour. After an experiment has been prepared, the experiment vehicle
is enclosed in a protective cover. The experiment vehicle is then suspended by its support shaft from a
hinged-plate release mechanism at the top of the vacuum chamber. An umbilical cable is attached to
the support shaft to maintain monitoring and control of the experiment during the pump down process.
The umbilical is remotely pulled one-half second prior to release. The experiment vehicle is released
by hydraulically shearing a bolt that is holding the hinged plate in a closed position. No measurable
disturbances are imparted to the experiment by the release procedure. 5.18 seconds of reduced gravity
are obtained by allowing the experiment vehicle to free fall in a vacuum through a distance of 132 m.
After the experiment vehicle traverses the 132 m distance, it is decelerated in a 3.6 m diameter, 6.1 m
deep container which is filled with small pellets of expanded polystyrene. An average deceleration
rate of 35 g's is controlled by the flow of the pellets through the annular area between the experiment
vehicle and the container wall. Peak deceleration loads reach 65 g's for several milliseconds.
The experiment vehicle, or drop bus, serves as the load bearing carrier structure for the experiment and
protects the research equipment mounted within from the deceleration shock loads. The experiment
vehicle also provides services such as power and programmable controllers. The primary vehicle

47
L - __ _

configuration currently used is cylindrical (with a conical tip). The vehicle, which is shown in Figure 6
outfitted with the Solid Surface Combustion Experiment engineering model, has an overall height of
3.4 m and gross weight of 1135 kg. The tes t section of ano ther vehicle equipped with a general purpose
combus tion chamber is shown in Figure 7. This test section, which facili ta tes the mounting of
experiment hardware, is 1 m in diameter and 1 m in heigh t. Experiments with hardware w eight up to
455 kg can be accommodated in the vehicle. As in the Drop Tower, data from experiments is acquired
using high speed motion picture cameras with framing rates of up to 1,000 frames/second, video cameras
(with onboard video recorders) and data acquisition systems which are utilized to record da ta such as
temperature, pressure, and flow rates. Onboard battery packs supply the necessary power after the
experiment is dropped . The key features of the Zero-Gravity Research Facility are summarized in
Table 2.
The Lewis Research Center operates a specially modified Learjet model 25 in support of microgravity
programs. The aircraft can obtain 18 to 22 seconds of low gravity by flying a parabolic (Keplerian)
trajectory. The aircraft accomplishes this with a rapid climb to a 50 to 55 degree angle (pull up), then
slows as it traces a parabola (pushover), and then descends at a 30 degree angle (pull out). It is during
the pushover that gravi ty levels on the order of 10-2 are obtained. During the pull up and pull out the
aircraft experiences brief periods of increased g, ranging fro m 2.5 - 3 g. The Learjet can also provide
intermediate levels of 1/20 to 3/4 of earth gravity. Although the red uced gravity levels obtained
aboard the aircraft are not as low as those obtai ned in drop towers, the aircraft offers the advantages
of increased low gravity du ration, real ti me monitoring and recon figuration of the experi ment in low
gravity by an onboard operator, and a very minima l high gravity recovery.
The Learjet has 185 cm of cabin length availa ble for experiment mounting and researcher seating. As
many as three researchers can be accommodated. Due to the limited cabin volume, experiments must be
attached to the aircraft, and generally only on e ex periment is installed a t a time (Figure 8).
Experiments are typica lly mou nted in standard racks w hich were develo ped specifically for Learjet
experimen ts. These racks have a usable volume 72 cm high, by 60 cm wide, by 52 cm deep. Each rack is
li mited to a to tal weight of 85.2 kg. Two racks can easily be accommodated in the aircraft. Experiment
specific racks can be designed when th e standard racks are no t adequate. For examp le, a special rack
was deve loped to mou nt a Ge t Away Special Canister in the Learjet. All hardware mounted in the
aircraft must be designed to withstand the following loads, when applied one at a time: 9.0 g forward,
7.0 g downward, 2.0 g up, 1.5 g aft, 1.5 g side.
Accelerations aboard the Learjet are measured by three servo-accelerometers which are oriented along
the pitch, lateral, and longitudinal axes of the aircraft. The inherent accuracy of the accelerometer
system is + / - 0.()()5 g's, but the lowest accelerations achievable during a trajectory are somewhat
higher due to air turbulence and other flight control factors. Output from the accelerometers is sent to
the cockp it d isplays fo r use by the pilots for control of the trajectory. The analog outputs are also stored
on a strip chart recorder aboard the ai rcraft, and can be supplied to experimenters for storage on their
d ata systems.
The Learjet can complete a maximum of six trajectories before landing if minimum accelerations are
obtained. Typical flight time for a six trajectory flight is approximately 1.5 hours. One to two flights
are generally conducted per day. Because experiments aboard the aircraft do not experience the high g
recovery periods associated with drop towers, virtually any ground-based laboratory equipment can be
supported aboard the Learjet. Three sources of electrical power are available to researchers: 28 VDC,
80 amps maximum; 115 VAC 60 Hz, 7.5 amps maximum; and 115 VAC 400 Hz, 18.3 amps maximum.
Table 3 summarizes the pertinent characteristics of the Learjet.
The Johnson Space Center operates a Boeing KC-135A aircraft in support of low gravity research. The
aircraft is a four engine jet transport similar to the Boeing 707. The aircraft achieves low gravity by
flying a parabolic (Keplerian) trajectory similar to the one described for the Learjet. Up to 23 seconds of
reduced gravity conditions can be obtained during each trajectory. The gravity level experienced by an

48

experi ment fixed to the aircraft floor is approxima tely 10-2 g's. Due to the larger cabin space
available, experiments flown aboard the KC-135 can also be free-floated during a trajectory. Freefloating enables an experiment to experience a gravity level on the order of 10-3 g's to 104 g's . However,
depending on the experiment size, free-float packages usually impact the aircraft walls or ceiling
before the end of the trajectory, shortening the low gravity time to 5 to 8 seconds. The KC-135 is also
capable of flying partial gravity trajectories. Typically, about 40 trajectories are completed per flight.
Flights generally are 2 to 3 hours in duration and one flight is conducted per day. The KC-135 has a
much larger volume than the Learjet. The aircraft has a usable cabin length of 18.28 m and a width of
3.25 m. Experiment size is limited by the cargo door of the aircraft which measures 1.90 m high by
2.99 m wide. Experiment weight is limited by the aircraft's maximum floor loading of 976.5 kg/m2.
Experiment hardware m ust be designed to withstand the following emergency loading condition: 9 g's
forward load, 3 g's aft, 2 g's lateral, 2 g's up, and 6 g's down. Because of the aircraft's large volume it is
common to have numerous experiments, both fixed and free floating integrated for the same flight (see
Figures 9 and 10). The KC-135 has 3 types of electrical power available to experimenters: 28 VDC,
80 amps; 110 V AC, 60 HZ, 20 amps; and 110 VAC, 400 HZ, 3 phase, 50 amps per phase. The aircraft is
also equipped with bottle racks to carry standard K-bottles of inert gases, as well as an overboard vent
system to allow for manual or automatic venting of liquids or gases in flight.
Like the Learjet the KC-135 can support a wide range of instrumentation and data systems. Gravity
level data in the z-axis (vertical) only is measured during the trajectories and is available for input
into research data systems. JSC can also provide photographic equipment and personnel, to support the
needs of flight researchers. Further information and documentation regarding KC-135 operation can be
found in the "JSC Reduced Gravity Program User's Guide" ( JSC-22803).
From the above summary of the description of the NASA low-gravity facilities, it is evident that each
facility has its own unique capabilities and limitations regarding the amount of test time, purity of
reduced gravity levels, experiment size, operations and researcher interaction. Even though there are
limitations, particularly in the amount of available low gravity time, the facilities have enjoyed a
high level of effectiveness in meeting the needs of many investigations. The effectiveness of the
facilities is evident in a large body of literature which has reported the results achieved using low
gravity data obtained from the facilities particularly in the disciplines of combustion and fluids. Also,
there have been a number of successful technology developments and successful space flight experiments
based on activities executed in the facilities. Specific information regarding facility operations and
some experiment hardware will follow.
Facility Operations (Guidelines
Effective utilization of the reduced gravity facilities begins with the selection of the appropriate
facility in which to conduct an investigation. Facility selection generally is based on the following
guidelines: experiments which are exploratory or require a large number of tests and do not require more
than 2.2 seconds of test time should be conducted in the Drop Tower; well-defined experiments that
require additional test time and high purity low gravity levels are candidates for the Zero-Gravity
Research Facility; experiments which require longer test times and/or can tolerate higher reduced
gravity levels and/or require operator interaction or are simply too large for the drop facilities should
be considered for testing on the Learjet or KC-135 aircraft. The above represent initial guidelines.
Discussions with the respective facility managers and experienced NASA investigators are also
required in making a final determination. Note that for all facilities, investigators have the option of
providing their own hardware up to a completely assembled experiment, utilizing existing NASA
hardware (sometimes in a sharing arrangement) when feasible, or working with their technical
monitor and facility operations personnel who will oversee experiment build-up.
The Drop Tower offers the greatest opportunity for "hands-on" investigations as well as the
opportunity for the execution of a large test matrix (some hardware has been utilized for hundreds of

49

drops) and easy uti lization of investiga tor-provided hardware. In most instances drop frames are sent
to the investigator's institution for experiment assembly.

Drop Tower personnel are available for

consultation regarding all phases of an experiment, and also for limited hardware integration and
assembly. Investigators are ultimately responsible for the testing and maintenance of their hardware.
NASA-provided hardware besides the d rop frame, can include cameras, certain electronics components,
and data acquisition and control systems. A review of Table 1 will serve as guidance for design criteria
for the Drop Tower. As mentioned previously, in so me cases existing hardware or general purpose drop
packages can be used with minor modifications and sharing of that equipment can be arranged.
The Zero Gravity Research Facility operations philosophy is unique particularly when compared to
that of the Drop Tower. Except for a few experiments, the design, fabrication, assembly, integration,
checkout and test operations are the responsibility of the facility operations personnel. Fo r programs
where hardware is furnished, facility personnel are available to consult on the design and buildup of
the experiments. Operations personnel also have the responsibility to integrate the experiments into
the drop vehicles and conduct the drop tests. Another major characteristic of the Zero Gravity Facility
is that there are four experiment vehicles available to support experiments . Due to costs and
complexity of the hardware involved, experiment vehicles become multi-user /multipurpose in nature.
This situation is very different from the Drop Tower, where, in most cases du e to lower costs and
complexities, experiment-specific drop frames and ex periments can be built-up if needed.
Tab le 2 summarizes the criteria that should be considered for Zero-Gravity Facility ex periments .
However, a few of them, due to their imp ortance, are stated here. These design criteria include the
following: experiments must be designed to opera te in a vac uum environment; experi ments should be
capable of unattended control for a minimum of one hour after fina l checkout to all ow for experiment
vehicle integration into the facility in preparation for the drop test; because of the uniqueness of the
facility and potential hazardous condi tions to personnel wo rking around the experiment vehicle during
facility opera tions, the experiment must pass a stringent safety review (sa fety reviews are required fo r
testing in all of the facilities); and because of environ mental concerns , limits may be imparted on the
types and quantities of fluids or gases available fo r testing.
Aircraft experiments require a close inte rface between the inves ti gator and the operations engi neering
staff to ens ure safety, and thus personnel at LeRC a re an integral component of this type of tes ting. For
the Learjet, an operations engineer and supp or t staff similar to that of the Zero-Gravity Facility are
available to integrate investigator-provided hardware into an experiment package or to have the
responsibility for the design, fab rication, asse mbl y, integration and checko ut of new hardware. A
summary of some of the design constraints can be found in Table 3. In either case, the operations engineer
is responsible for the prepara tion of detailed safety docu mentation that must meet the approval of the
LeRC Airworthiness Review Panel. The investigator will be required to provide certain elements of
this documentation. Investigators who plan to fly on the Learjet are required to provide the LeRC
Aircraft Operations Office with certification of both a current flight physical (minimum FAA Class III
or Air Force Class III) and record of attendance at either a military or FAA passenger /crew
physiological training class.
KC-135 experiments can also be sup ported by LeRC personnel in the same capacity as for Learjet
experiments. Even though the KC-135 is ope rated out of JSc, the Marshall Space Flight Center
(MSFC) has the responSibility for coordinating and scheduling flights for experiments sponsored by the
MSAD of NASA Headquarters. LeRC personnel are availab le to assist investigators with the various
documentation and contacts (MSFC and JSc) necessary for meeting the requirements for KC-135 flights.
Also, LeRC-sponsored KC-135 experiments per JSC guidelines must be reviewed and approved by the
LeRC Airworthiness Review Panel. The hardware will also be reviewed by a J5C safety committee for
approval prior to flight. The "JSC Reduced Gravity Program User's Guide" provides complete details
of experiment design guidelines and requirements for personnel who will be flying on the KC-135.

50

Another aspect of facility utilization involves coord ina tion with NASA personnel. A NASA
researcher or scientist is assigned to be a contract technical representative to any LeRC-sponsored
investigation in the ground-based facilities. This individua l will have the responsibility to provide
the sponsored researcher with the necessary guidance regard ing facility utilization and also assist in
establishing an interface with operations personnel in the various facilities. The activities that wiJI
be coordinated with this individual include the following: arrangement of a pre-design meeting with
the appropriate operations and design engineers to discuss the investigation, objectives, measurements
required, hardware needs, design and procurement responsibilities and the like; maintenance of
communications with operations personnel during the design and build-up phase; assistance in the
preparation of a Test Request Document (directed to the appropriate operations engineer) w hich
formally defines experiment details and experiment milestones, etc. ; assistance in scheduling tests;
and consultation during the testing phase. LeRC mechanical and electronics technicians are available
during the testing phase for repairs or modifications that cannot be performed by the investigator. This
support may not always be available in a timely manner due to the many investigations that are
ongoing.
Experiment Hil rdwil re I I nves tigil tia ns
As stated earlier, the NASA ground-based facili ties have supported a wide range of investigations
over the past thirty years particularly in the fields of combustion and fluids. Table 4 represents a
sampling of a few of the recent experiment programs that have been carried out in the facilities. Many
of the investigations have utilized more than one faci li ty. A description of some of the hardware will
be presented to show what is feas ible. Of course these descriptions represent examples of capabilities.
Simpler or more complex systems have been or can be engineered depending on the needs of the
inves tiga tion.
The inventory of operational drop rigs at the Drop Tower has reached twenty-five with several more
in the build-up phase. One of those that will soon become available is an updated multipurpose, multiuser combustion rig that will address investigations including solid material flammability, gas-jet
diffusion flames, candle flames, and spacecraft fire safety. The test chamber for this rig will have an
internal volume of .027 m3 (.25 m 1. 0 ., .53 m length), a working pressure of 4.8 atmospheres, five
viewing windows, and several feedthro ughs and penetrations for mechanical and electrical hardware
connections. The data acquisition capabilities will incl ude accommodations for four thermocouples, one
pressure transducer, and movie and video systems. The rig will also have provisions for a laser light
sheet and a shock absorption plate system for the mounting of sensitive components.
Since there are fewer ex peri men t vehicles available at the Zero-Gravity Facility, more multipurpose
hardware exists, particularly for combustion research. There are three combustion experiment vehicles
available. They contain combustion chambers with the following specifications:
1. The general combustion vehicle shown in Figure 7 contains a 113 m 3, 0.4 m internal diameter
hemispherical domed cylindrical pressure vessel. The vessel has a centerline length of 0.98 m
and a maximum working pressure of 13.6 atmosphere. This chamber has been utilized to support
investigations in pool fires, solid materials flammability, spacecraft fire safety, candle flames,
etc. This vehicle is adap table to many investigations.

2. The Gas Jet Diffusion Flame Experiment contains a hemispherical domed cylindrical pressure
vessel with an internal volume of 0.087 m 3 . The pressure vessel has a 0.41 m internal diameter
and a centerline length of .71 m. The maximum working pressure of the vessel is 4 atmospheres.
An internal movable thermocouple and gas sampling probe rake is a part of the vessel
configuration. This vehicle is currently employed solely for gas-jet diffusion flame research.
3. The convection /co mbustion vehicle con tains a horizontal cylindrical pressure vessel with a
centerline length of .91 m and a 0.31 m internal diameter. The maximum working pressure of the

51

vessel is six atmospheres. Internal to the vessel is a .19 m square fan duct, .61 m long. The fan
duct is capable of providing flow velocities of 5 to 50 cm/sec at two atmospheres. A mechanical

translation device expands testing into the 0-5 cm/sec velocity range. The convection/combustion
vehicle should be adaptable to many investigations also.
All the above experiment vehicles provide high speed movie camera or video photography,
programmable controllers, batteries (nominal 28 VDC), a data acquisition system and essential
mechanical support systems such as valves and gas charging systems.
A number of combustion and fluids investigations have been conducted aboard the Learjet. Unlike the
drop tower facilities, there are currently no dedicated combustion experimental facilities available.
This is due to the fact that many of the programs on the Learjet have been development tests for
specific shuttle flight hardware. However, a multipurpose combustion experiment known as the
Spacecraft Fire Safety Experiment is currently being developed for use on the Learjet and the KC-135.
This hardware is being designed fo r the following investigations:
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Extinguishment of established fires by addition of extinguishing agents.
Extinguishment of established fires by pressure reduction.
Measurement of flame spread rate on engineering materials in various oxidizing atmospheres.
Measurement of flame spread rate on engineering materials in flowing oxidizer streams.
Development and testing of space-based smoke/fire detection systems.
Development and testing of combustion diagnostics instrumentation.

The experimental hardware will consist of a domed cylindrical pressure vessel with a centerline length
of 74.3 cm and a diameter of 25.4 cm. The maximum working pressure of the chamber will be 3
atmospheres. The maximum oxidizing flow velocities will be 40 cm/s at 1 atmosphere and 20 cm/s at 3
atmospheres. Instrumentation for the chamber will include thermocouples, pressure transducers, video
and motion picture cameras, and mass flow controllers. Data acquisition and experiment control will be
handled by a personal computer. The combustion chamber will also be equipped with extra ports for
ad ditional instrumentation or di agnostics equipment. This apparatus is scheduled for completion in
late October, 1992.
LeRC-developed KC-135 hardw are to date has been quite experiment specific. The G ravitational
Influences on Flammability and Flamespread Test System (GIFFTS) is one of those experiments. The
so phisticated hardware supports a fundamental inves tigation into the combustion of thin solid fuels in
the presence of very low-speed concurrent airflows that are induced by buoyancy in various levels of
inertial acceleration, thereby simulating upward burning combustion behavior over a range of gravity
levels. This is the first project to utilize a schlieren system in a reduced-gravity environment. Data
obtained from this investigation includes motion picture imaging of the thermal field cons tituting the
flame in order to deduce its size, sha pe and propagation speed, local temperatures of the fuel in the
surro unding gases and three-axis measurements of the local accelerations. The hardware is mounted in
two racks and utilizes a gas bottle sup port rack necessary for the various atmospheric test conditions.
One rack can be fixed to the aircraft or free-fl oated. This rack is equipped with a test chamber with an
interior volume of 25 liters, a sa mple holder, the test specimen, up to 6 type K thermocouples, a
Kanthol alloy ignitor wire and an incandescent light bulb. The schlieren optical system which
consists of 30 optical elements, a light source, a miniature video camera, and video cassette recorder is
also a component of this main rack along with the sys tem control and management computer, three-axis
accelerometer, pressure transducer, power supply box and batteries. The support rack, which supports
sample changeout and data storage functions, consists of a gas handling subsystem, sample storage,
video display and power supply and laptop computer. This experiment has been flown at "normal"
parabolic maneuvers in both a fixed and free-float mode, and at 1/6 g (lunar gravity) and 1/3 g
(Martian gravity) in only the fixed mode.

52

Concluding Comments
Over the past 30 years the LeRC reduced gravity facilities have provided data which have
significantly advanced the understanding of low gravity processes and phenomena and enabled the
development of space-based technology. Research executed under low gravity conditions will continue
to grow through the era of space-based research in order to provide critical, economical pre-flight
scientific data and technology verification. Experiments are destined to grow in complexity,
particularly in the area of diagnostics.

References
1. The Microgravity Combustion Group, Microgravity Combustion Science: Progress, Plans, and
Opportunities. NASA TM-10S41D. 1992.
2. Low-Gravity Fluid Physics: A Program Overview. NASA TM-10321S. 1990.
3. JSC Reduced Gravity Program User's Guide. JSC-22803. 1991.

53

Table 1.
2.2 Second Drop Tower: Characteri stics and Capabiliti es

Opera ti o nal Parameters
- Low gravity duration :
- Gravitational accelerati on:
- Deceleration levels :

2.2 seconds (free fall: normal atmos phere wi th d rag shi eld sys tem)
- 1D-Sg
40 to 100 g's for several milliseconds « 40 g's wi th shock absorp tion
system)

Experiment Enyelope Summary
- Drop Frame "standard " (alu minum bus for mo unting hardwa re)
- width (depth): 40cm
- length:
91cm
- height:
81 to 102 em
- dimensions iden tified are maximum
- variations of standard frame are feasible
- Experiment hardware weight: 140 kg (maxim um)
Experiment Instrumentatio n /Da ta Acquisitio n Capabilities
- High speed movie cameras
Thermocouples
Video cameras (fiber optic link to recorder)
Pressure transducers
Battery packs (l 10V AC feasible)
Flow meters
Data acquisition and control system
- Lase rs
Mode of Operation
- Engineering support for consultation
- Technical staff to support electronics and mechanical integration and maintenance
- Technician and investiga tor perform drops
- Twelve drops per day (minimum of two drops per day per investigator)
- Safety review required
Additional Features
- Compressed gas (fuels, oxidant, and diluents) storage, handling, and delivery su pport available
- Limited community tool supply
- Film motion analyzer
NASA contacts:
Jack Lekan: (216) 433-3459
Mike Johnston: (216) 433-5002

54

Table 2.
Zero-Gravity Research Facility: Characteristics and Capabilities
Operational Parameters
- Low gravity duration:
- Gravitational Acceleration:
- Deceleration levels:

5.18 seconds (free fall: evacuated chamber @ 10-2 Torr)
<10- 5 g
up to 65 g's for several milliseconds (mean: 35 g)

Experiment Enyelope Summary
- Cylindrical experiment vehicle
- diameter:
1m
- total height:
3.4 m
- paylod height: 1 m
- payload weight up to 455 kg
- cold gas thrust system available for:
0.003 g to 0.015 g*

Rectangular Experiment Vehicle*
- LxW xH:
15 m x 0.5 mx 15 m
- payload envelope L x W xH:
0.61 m x 0.40 m x 0.45 m
- payload weight:
up to 69 kg
- cold gas thrust system available for:
O.003g to O.037g (positive);
0.013 g to 0.070 g (negative)

Experiment Instrumentation IDMa Acquisi tion C(! pabi Ii ties
- Telemetry: 18 channels of continuous data telemetered from experiment (standard IRIG FM/FM,
frequency range: 6 to 1()(X)() cps, and overall system accuracy of 2% to 3%)
High speed movie cameras
Video cameras
Battery packs
Data acquisition and control system
Closed-circuit television system
Thermocou pies
Pressure transducers
Flow meters
- Lasers
Mode of Oper(!tion
- Engineering staff to support design, build-up and testing
- Facility engineering staff perform drops
- One to two drops per day
- Safety review required
Additional Features
- Compressed gas (fuels, oxidant, and diluents) storage, handling, and delivery support available
- Film motion analyzer
- Class 10000 clean room
NASA contact:

Ray Satos: (216) 433-5485
* These options are not currently in use, but could be made available to satisfy specific requirements.

55

Table 3.
Learjet: Characteristics and Capabilities
O pera tj o nal pa ram eters
- Low gravity duration:
- Gravitationa l acce leration:
- N umber of trajectories per flight:
- Maxi mum power:

18 to 22 seconds (parabo lic trajec tory)
10-2 g (1/20 to 3/4 normal gravity levels possible)
6 (maxi m um at 10-2 g)
28 VDC, 80 amp s
110 VAC, 60Hz, 7.5 a m ps
110 VAC, 400Hz, 18.3 a mps

Ex periment Enyelope Su m mary
NASA-provided racks
- le n gth:
60.9 cm
- width:
52.7cm
- height :
90.8 cm
- stress limits: weight: 85.27 kg , total moment: 369.23 Nm
Cabin length: 1.85m
Experiment Instrumentation (Data Acquisition Ca pabilities
- Three-axis accelerometer system
- LeRC-approved instrumentation provided by the investigator
- High speed movie cameras
- Data acquisition and control system
Mode of Operation
- Engineering staff to suppo rt design and integration of hardware
- Flight-qualified investigators conduct in-flight experiments (flight physical and physiological
training required)
- Two flights per day are possible
- Safety review requi red
Additional Features
- LeRC personnel available to fly with payload
- Accommodations for Get Away Special Cannister expe riments

NASA contact
Eric Ne umann: (216) 433-2608

56

1

l
I
\

r
I

Table 4.
Examples of In vestigations Performed in Ground-Based Facilities
Drop
Tower

Zero-G
Facility

Laminar Gas Jet Diffusion Flames

•

•

Droplet Combustion - Pure Fuels at
Low and Ambient Pressures

•

•

Laminar and Turbulent Flames at
Microgravity

•

Flame Spread over Solids in
Quiescent Environments

•

Fundamental Study of Smolderin g
Combustion in Microgravity

•

Ignition and Flame Spread over
Liquid Fuels

•

•

Candle Flames in Microgravity

•

•

Interface Dynamics

•

Investigati on

Learjet

KC-135

•

•
•
•

•

•
•

Vibration Isolation Technology
Development
High Pressure Combustion of
Binary-Fuel Droplets

•

Studies of Flame Structure in
Microgravity

•

Combustion of Solid Fuel in Very Low
Speed Oxygen Streams

•

Flame Spread over Thin Solid Fuels in
Quiescent and Slow, Opposed Flow
Environments

•

Burke-Schumann Diffusion Flames

•

Capillary Flow

•

Multiphase Flow

•

•

Experiments in Low-G Fire Suppression
and Extinguishment Effectiveness

•

•

•
•

•

Solidification Phase Change
Cryogen Nitrogen Transfer

•

Pool Boiling

•

57

•

Space station
Shuttle and
Spacelab -,
I

I
,

Commercially
developed
space
facility

Year

107

Month

() 1 d'
~

Week

~

.~ 1Q5

Day

C>

" 1Q4
g
"
~

'0
§

Hour
1 ()3

~
::l
o 1Q2

MIR-2 sounding rocket (Russia)
Minute

10'

1~

Sounding rockets (U .S.A.)

Airplanes

L __ _ _ _~_ _ _ _L __ __ L_ _ _ _~_ _~L__ _~

10-'

10-5

10-2

10-7

Acceleration level, 90

Figure I.-Characteri s tic times and acce le rilti on leve ls of redu ced- g rilv ity lilboratory facilit ies.

12 Uc;ooD IlfIOI' lOW!IlA$tUWl$flUIlNtCtiCfl(IlJI

..,.,o«*" ""'It$'

'i

Figure 2.-Cutaway rendering of the LeRC 2.2
Second Drop Tower.

58

Figure 3.-2.2 Second Drop Tower package (Co mbustion Diagnostics Laser Rig) .

I
I

I
I

DECELERATOR
(37 MHER UI. . . . . ._
6 1 METER

CONCRETE
LINED SHAn

BOTTOM Of SHAn
. / 1155 "fTERS BHOW

I

GROUND LEVEl)

Figure 4.-Drop Tower experiment package d rilg
shield assembly.

Figure 5.-Cutaway rendering of the LeRC ZeroGravity Research Facility.

Figure 6.-Cylindrical experiment vehicle
utilized in the LeRC Zero-Gravity Research
Facility.

Figure 7.-Test section of cylindrical experiment
vehicle outfitted with a multipurpose combustion
chamber.

S9

0-

\\

·
•
•

•

•
~

;

Figure 8.-LeRC Learjet cabin with experiment hardware.

Figure 9.-JSC KC-135 cabin with multiple
ex perimen ts.

60

Figure lO.-Free-f1oat experiment aboard the JSC
KC-135.

J

~I

I
CAPABILITIES AND CONSTRAINTS OF COMBUSTION DIAGNOSTICS
IN MICRO GRAVITY
Paul S. Greenberg
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

I. Introduction

A significant scientific return from both existing and proposed microgravity combustion science experiments is
substantially dependent on the availability of diagnostic systems for the collection of the required scientific data.
To date, the available diagnostic instrumentation has consisted primarily of conventional photographic media and
intrusive temperature and velocity probes, such as thermocouples and hot wire anemometers. This situation has
arisen primarily due to the unique and severe operational constraints inherent in reduced gravity experimentation.
Each of the various reduced gravity facilities is accompanied by its own peculiar envelope of capabilities and
constraints. Drop towers, for example, pose strict limitations on available working volume and power, as well as
autonomy of operation. In contrast. hardware developed for space flight applications can be somewhat less
constrained in regards to the aforementioned quantities. but is additionally concerned with numerous issues involving
safety and reliability.
The Microgravity Combustion Diagnostics (MCD) group exists to provide diagnostic systems of greater
sophistication. The group is located within the Microgravity Combustion Science Branch at NASA-Lewis Research
Center. and is funded by NASA Headquarters through the Advanced Technology Development Program. Collocation
within this branch helps to assure that the focus of the development efforts are consistent with the scientific
objectives of both in-house and sponsored investigators. Although the laboratory staff is frequently involved with
the design of diagnostic systems for flight project applications. the MCD program operates on an independent basis,
and is not responsible for the design of hardware critical to the development schedule of the space flight projects.
The personnel presently supporting this area represent the disciplines of instrumentation and optical systems design.
spectroscopy. and computer science.
For a variety of reasons. predominant emphasis has been placed on the development of optical diagnostic techniques.
Principal among these is the relative fragility of reduced gravity combustion phenomena as compared to their 1-g
counterparts. The action of buoyancy induced convection is vigorous compared to the dominant mechanisms
affecting reduced gravity combustion, such as thermal and concentration driven diffusion. The essentially
nonpenurbative nature of optical measurement techniques is, therefore, well suited to this application. In adclition,
optical techniques are. in general, amenable to the acquisition of multi-climensional data fields (i.e. imaging). This
is an imponant consideration in the present state of microgravity combustion science. since a clearer understanding
of basic phenomenology, including the verification of fundamental length and time scales and dominating physical
mechanisms is still being developed. The ability to simultaneously acquire multi-dimensional data is also an
imponant consideration in the conduct of reduced gravity experimental investigations, since many of the facilities
(e.g. drop towers and aircraft) provide periods of only limited duration. Space-borne payloads, in contrast, can
provide longer operating times, but are restrictive in terms of repeated access to the investigator, in the amount of
power and expendables that may be consumed. and in the total amount of combustion products that can be generated
and released into the air.
The process of developing diagnostic systems appropriate for microgravity combustion research does not end in the
Ig laboratory. There are a number of reasons why this should be the case. the most significant of which is the
differing behavior exhibited by most combustion phenomena under reduced gravity conditions. This is most easily
seen in the example of qualitative imaging techniques. In one such example. results indicating an apparent threshold
for ignition were later revealed to be an actual threshold in sensitivity of the imaging device under consideration.
Differences in mixing and transport phenomena impact overall temperature clistributions. population yields of
individual species, and resulting temporal and spatial scales. Attempts to duplicate all or part of these observations
in the laboratory using such tactics as reduced pressures or varying oxygen concentrations have been marginally
successful at best Thus. the true figure of merit for a given technique requires, iI. the majority of cases, the

61

transition from the laboratory into one of the various reduced gravity facilities. This transition unfortunately carries
with it complications of its own. The MCD group at LeRC, for example, attempts to initially deploy hardware in
the drop tower facil ities whenever possible. This decision is affected primarily by reasons of timely access, rapid
turnaround, and cost. Utilization of this particular facility, however, carries with it many of its own peculiarities that
are completely removed from where the instrument may ultimately reside. The available working volume and
electrical power, in addition to the severe shock loads that occur at the termination of the drop , are among the most
difficult constraints that can be encountered. These constraints would not be as significant an issue in the design
of a space borne instrument, but result from the decision to pursue the course of development in th is specific facility.
The specific experimental parameters of concern are similar to those of interest in terrestrial combustion science
laboratories. It is most oflen desirable to precede detailed and prec ise quantitative measurements with qualitative
flow visualization methods. This provides the investigator with a global picture of the complete process, and serves
to guide or refine the specific requirements for the quantitative measurements that are to follow . For this purpose,
the MCD group has utilized conventional photographic media, conventional and intensified solid-state imaging
devices, ultraviolet and infrared sensitive solid-state devices, reacti ve seeding methods, and schlieren imaging. The
quan titative determ ination of temperature, species concentration, and velocity fields comprises a signifi cant portion
of the diagnostic development effortS. The characterization of droplets and panicles are also represented. As will
be discussed, the panicular constraints associated wi th reduced gravity experimentation motivate approaches that are
often unique to these appl ications. Recent advances in solid-state laser and detector technologies, however, are
rapidly changing, and are placing us in a position more closely resembling those in progress in industrial and
academic research laboratories.
II. Physical Constraints
Each of the venues available to the red uced gravity experiment investigator is accompanied by its own un ique
collection of physical and operational constraints and available utili ties. (IJ It shou ld be noted, however, that a
concern for diagnostic amenities is most often not a major factor in the determination of the appropriate vehicle for
any given experiment. The dominant emphasis is j ustifiably placed on the accommodation of the combustion
phenomenon itself, involving factors such as duration, required g-levels, attendant expertise, storage of consumables,
thermal and combustion product generation, and safety. While the specifics concern ing the available power, volume,
etc. of the various reduced gravity facilities have been discussed in the preced ing presentations, a number of
additional observations are in order.
While affording the most ready access to reduced gravity ex perimentation, drop towers arc unquestionably the most
challenging of the facilities in regards to the constraints that they present. Panicularly in the case of the 2.2 second
facility, the available working volume and electrical power are severely limited. The 5.18 second facility is
somewhat more generous, but still limited in comparison with aircraft facilities . The latter has the added
complication of being operated under vacuum conditions. An example of the problems that this can create is seen
in the behavior of some photographic films, which become brittle and can shatter upon impact. Pressurized
experiment canisters have been constructed, but are an additional inconvenience to operate and maintain. Drop
towers do not permit tended operation of the package, and are problematic due to impact loading during deceleration.
This brings to bear questions not only of survivability of individual components, but of inordinate optical diagnostic
realignment requirements subsequent to each test. The MCD group has successfully demonstrated a system for the
reduction of deceleration loads. This system is consistently yielding impact accelerations of only 30 to 40 g' s, and
appears capable of considerable improvement below this level. The free travel required by this system, however,
creates the need for a certain amount of free volume. This represents a substantial tax against an already restrictive
condition.
Tethers in the drop tower facilities have been used for purposes of data and power transmission. A multi-mode fiber
optic system now used routinely offers video-based image transmission. The 100 micron fiber and its protective
sheath have negligible effect on the trajectory of the roughly 500 kilogram package/drag shield assembly. This
system facilitates real-time viewing of the experiment package, both prior to and during the drop, and also permits
the use of off-line analog and digital storage capabilities. A 110 VAC tether has also been employed for power
transmission. The substantially larger cable size has proven to be somewhat unwieldy and is seldom used. A near-

62

IR diode absorption spectrometer presently being constructed under contract by Southwest Sciences, Inc. will be
completely coupled via fiber optic tether, and will have one multi-mode transmission fiber and eight distinct singlemode detection fibers. This tethering not only isolates sources and detectors from impact loads, but permits power
supplies, signal conditioning, and data logging electronics to be remotely located, thereby freeing up valuable power
and volume on the package itself. The transmission of substantial amounts of laser power, particularly in pulsed
laser applications, through the required lengths of fiber is still somewhat impractical. Several schemes have been
proposed for relaying higher laser powers to the experiment package by allowing an expanded beam to freely
propagate through space. Due to the essentially straight trajectory of the package, some schemes appear traCtable,
but have as yet not been implemented.
Reduced gravity aircraft are in some ways the most forgiving from the standpoint of diagnostic systems. Available
utilities and working volume are considerably more generous in comparison to the drop tower facilities. Although
the hardware must be capable of withstanding 9-g loads (as required by flight safety), this is modest relative to the
drop towers. The possibility of tended operation is also a distinct advantage. While safety related flight-worthiness
reviews are mandated, they do not approach the rigor encountered in space flight reviews. The primary pitfall
associated with the reduced gravity aircraft is the relatively poor g-levels that are available. This fact alone presents
an untenable situation for many investigators. Nonetheless, aircraft remain excellent platforms for the demonstration
and trouble shooting of diagnostic instrumentation. Some tests aimed at attaining lower residual g-levels by free
floating experiment packages within the aircraft have been conducted. This scenario results in significantly shoner
run times, and power and data lines must be replaced with tethers, similar to those described above.
Although sounding rockets have not yet been used by our group, they are under consideration as a carrier for several
experiments. From the standpoint of physical constraints, sounding rockets form an intermediary between drop
towers and reduced gravity aircraft. Provisions for power and working volume are comparable to those in the 5.18
sec facility, although the geometry of the payload package is somewhat peculiar (long and narrow). While launch
loads are considerably less than the impacts encountered in the towers, experiment hardware is subject to pre-flight
vibration testing of 50g each axis, over a 20 to 2000 Hz bandwidth. Bi-directional telemetry is available, permitting
a limited degree of opponunity for command and control functions
Actual space flight applications carry with them their own unique issues. As discussed in detail elsewhere, available
volume and utilities vary significantly, depending on the specific carrier and location under consideration. Operations
are tended, but it must be kept in mind that one is always operating through the "eyes, ears, and hands" of the flight
crew. As capable as they are, there is always a reasonable limit to the degree of expertise that can be expected.
They will never be as intimate with every facet of a given instrument as are those who developed it. Unquestionably
the most significant issue for experimenters that is encountered in inhabited spacecraft activities is that of proof of
safety under worst case assumptions. The resulting constraints placed on allowable materials, configurations, and
procedures can be extremely restrictive. Creativity and perseverance on the part of the payload developer are
ultimately balanced by the forces of time and cost.
III. Techniques Under Development
The MCD group has tried to provide nominal coverage of all of the experimental parameters demanded by the
current microgravity investigators. Initial priority has been given to qualitative visualization methods, followed by
temperature, species concentration, and velocity measurements. Particle (i.e. soot) and droplet measurements are a
more recent addition. Prioritization within each area is influenced to a degree by the schedules of both ground-based
and flight projects under development. While our group does not have direct involvement in producing flight-wonhy
systems, acknowledgement must be given to the issues that will ultimately be involved, such as available power and
mechanical stability requirements. The following paragraphs provide brief summaries in each of these areas.
Advanced techniques being employed for qualitative visualization include intensified solid-state imaging arrays
(including the use of band-filters), infrared imaging, reactive seeding, and Rainbow Schlieren imaging. Microchannel
plate image intensifiers provide a net photon gain on the order of 10', and have demonstrated adequate sensitivity
for all of the processes that have been encountered to date, which includes dilute premixed gas combustion, low
pressure gas jet diffusion flames, low pressure droplet combustion, and solid fuels under quiescent conditions. In

63

the case of dilute premixed hydrogen combustion, [2] prior experiments required the use of halon dopants to render
them visible. The addition of extraneous chem icals was a matter for concern, particularly as near-limit phenomena
were being investigated. The gain afforded by these devices allows the use of narrow bandwidth spectral fllters,
either to isolate particular emission bands such as that from CH radicals, or to mask the influence of extraneous
emissions, such as soot radiation. Photocathodes sensitive in both the visible spectrum and in the UV are being
utilized. These devices have been employed on both of the reduced-gravity aircraft, [2,3] but have not yet been
deployed in the drop towers. Data on the performance of the impact isolation system mentioned above is
encouraging, and will most likely result in the deployment of intensified arrays in drop tower facilities in the near
future. These arrays are also slated for inclusion in several flight projects presently under development.
A platinum silicide array has recently been obtained for imaging applications in the near to mid-IR. Suitable
sensitivity has been demonstrated in the laboratory to visualize extremely weak flames, even in the presence of
narrow bandwidth IR filters. This opens the possibilities for performing two-dimensional temperature field
measurements of known emissivity radiators, such as soot or grids of thin (15 micron) ceramic fibers suspended in
the flame. These types of fibers are already being utilized in the LeRC 2.2 sec drop tower for the qualitative
assessment of temperature distributions in droplets and gas jet diffusion flames. Radiative thermometry can be
accomplished by digitizing the output of the array and fitting the response as measured to the Planck distribution
function . Point and line measurements of this type have been widely reponed; [4] the extension to two-dimensions
appears reasonably straightforward.
A more complex characterization of the IR emission spectrum may enable, in certain cases, the determination of
major product species concentrations and temperatures. For simple fuels, resolving the spectrum through an
appropriate series of bandpass filters may be sufficient, whereas more complex systems may require a more elaborate
approach, such as imaging FTIR. A predictive code [5] is presently being utilized to calculate IR spectra for selected
flames. The objective is to invert the procedure: the measured emission spectra serving as the input for the
calculation of the emitting species and their temperatures.
Rainbow schlieren [6] imaging is also being utilized as a visualization method. Through the use of a continuous
color-based filtering scheme, gradients in the refractive index field appear as variations in color. The eye is quite
sensitive to these variations in color, much more so than to the grey scale variations provided by conventional knifeedge methods. In addition, the multi-colored images that result are more readily interpreted than the fringe shifts
provided by interferometric methods. Several compact optical systems have been designed and constructed, [7]
providing the capability for usin g this method in the drop towers and aboard the reduced gravity aircraft. A method
for quantifying the resulting ray deflections has been developed, providing the ability to determine refractive index
distributions with a measurement sensitivity comparable to interferometric methods. [8] The resulting instrument
is far simpler and mechanically robust than phase sensitive interferometers, and more readily adapted to large fieldsof-view.
The MCD group is also providing capabilities to support the acquisition, manipulation , and display of image based
data. [9] A dedicated PC-based workstation is available for image processing and analysis, as well as for hardware
and software development. Amenities are available for image transfer and archiving among various formats,
including 16 mm motion picture film, still photography, and direct digital imaging. Network access has been
established, linking this facility to the diagnostics laboratory, photographic laboratory, computer services laboratory,
and a variety of PC and Unix workstations serving individual users. A number of analysis routines have been
developed, including automated feature tracking and color characterization.
An effort has been initiated very recently to perform two-dimensional (i.e. planar) laser-based temperature and
species concentration measurements. The specific techniques under development include molecular Rayleigh
scattering, laser-induced fluorescence, and degenerate four-wave mixing. Techniques of this type were not initially
included in the scope of the MCD program due to the impracticality associated with the requisite laser sources.
Rapid advances in solid-state laser technology have significantly impacted this situation, bringing about the
availability of tuneable, pulsed lasers that can be credibly utilized in the reduced gravity facilities. A development
contract is presently being negotiated for a pulsed, line-narrowed Nd:Y AG(fi:Al,Q, laser with the capability for
frequency doubling, tripling, and mixing to access a number of species of interest. This laser is intended to be

64

compatible with the constraints of the reduced gravity aircraft. Several strategies for beam delivery in the drop
towers have been proposed, but are not presently scheduled for implementation.
An alternate technique for species concentration and temperature measurements via absorption spectroscopy is also
in progress. This system is being developed by Southwest Sciences, Inc., and utilizes high frequency FM modulation
and detection to obtain high sensitivity using inexpensive. near-IR laser diode sources. In the initial configuration,
a 1.3 1 micron diode laser will be utilized to detect absolute concentrations of methane and water vapor, as well as
the temperature of the latter. The use of high frequency modulation techniques results in shot-noise limited detection,
providing a minimal detectable fractional absorbance of 3 x 10"". Fiber optic coupling will allow the system to be
used in the drop towers; one multi-mode fiber will be employed for transmission, and eight separate single-mode
fibers for detection. This multi-channel arrangement will enable the inversion of axisymmetric distributions from
line-of-sight data by tomography. Through the substitution of appropriate source and detector combinations
numerous other species can be accessed, including CO, CO" 0 " OH, NH" and NO•.
Two techniques are being developed for velocity field measurements: particle image velocimetry (plY) and laser
doppler velocimerry (LDV) . Both require the addition of seed material to the flow to serve as scattering centers.
The specific PIV method being employed has been developed by the Optical Measurement Systems Branch of the
Instrumentation and Control Technology Division at LeRC, and employs direct recording from video-based image
sensors (as opposed to the utilization of a n intermediary photographic recording). (10) This method has been
successfully used in several liquid phase studies, including the recent flight of the Surface Tension Driven Convection
Experiment aboard STS-50. It has also been demonstrated in high speed gas phase flows. [11] An extremely
compact pulsed Nd:Y AG laser is presently being constructed to provide the capability for performing these
measurements aboard the reduced gravity aircraft. Lower velocity liquid-phase flow measurements can be performed
using relatively low-power laser sources, and are scheduled to be performed in the 2.2 sec drop tower within the
coming year. A compact laser doppler velocimeter is also under construction, [12] and utilizes a temperature
stabilized laser- diode source operating at 780 nanometers and a solid-state avalanche silicon photodiode detector.
The complete unit measures 65 mm in diameter and 175 mm in length, and is quite rugged. Laboratory experiments
are presently being configured using two similar units obtained on loan from the Department of the Navy. An effort
is also in progress in the design of a compact and robust signal processor. [13]
Measurement techniques applicable to the study of particles (i.e. soot) are also under development. Soot size
distributions measurements are being performed both in the laboratory and in the 2.2 sec drop tower using a
TEM) grids
pneumatically actuated thcrmophorelic sampling probe. [14] Small transmission electron microscopy C
are rapidly insened into the flame to collect soot and then withdrawn. TEM images are then analyzed to provide
information regarding the primary particles as well as the aggregated clusters. Size distribution measurements via
multi-angle light scattering have been performed in the laboratory, but are not presently scheduled for reduced gravity
implementation due to the relatively long integration times that are required. In addition, scattering measurements
do not provide information regarding the primary particles directly. The probe measurements are complemented by
light attenuation measurements to provide mass fraction and number density. This measurement is being
implemented in an imaging configuration, wherein threshold sensitivity is exchanged for overall spatial yield. This
is a reasonable tradeoff for the present measurements being performed in the 2.2 sec drop tower, where the limited
duration of the experiments do not facilitate pOint-by-point scanning of the soot field.
The vaporization of isolated fuel droplets is being investigated through the application of exciplex fluorescence. [15]
The addition of particular dopants permits the formation of liquid phase complexes which exhibit fluorescence at
longer wavelengths relative to the monomer state of the dopant material. In addition to providing the ability to
distinguish between liquid and vapor phase concentrations, thermometry can be performed from the ratio of these
temperature dependent fluorescent intensities. A complementary study is being conducted under contract by United
Technologies Research Center [16] for the measurement of flow fields both internal to the droplet and in the
surrounding gas-phase. In addition to exciplex fluorescence, the techniques of planar laser-induced fluorescence, gasphase flow tagging, and particle image velocimetry will be investigated.
A summary of the overall program in diagnostics development can be found in Table 2 of Reference 17. Shown
along with each particular method under development is the present status, as well as the currently envisioned plans

65

for incorporation in the various reduced gravity faci lities. It should be emphasized that the list of activities
undertaken by the MCD group and its associated conrractors has a certain flexibility . The results of ongoing
investigations, as well as new areas of interest advocated by the scientific community will continue to expand and
refine the complement of diagnostic capabilities that are available.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

Lekan, J., "Constraints and Capabilities of Drop Tower and Aircraft Facilities," Proceedings of the Second
International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Sept. 1992.
Whaling, K.N., Abbud-Madrid, A., Ronney, P.D., "Structure and Stability of Near-Limit Flames with Low Lewis
Number," Fall Technical Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Western States Section, LaJolla, CA, Oct 16-19,
1990.
Weiland, KJ ., "Intensified Camera Imaging of Solid Surface Combustion aboard the NASA Learjet," AIAA
Paper 92-0240, Jan. 1992; also available as NASA TM-105361.
Vilimpoc,V., Goss, L.P., Sarka, B., "Spatial Temperature-Profile Measurements by the Thin-Filament-Pyrometry
Method," Optics Letters lJ., 93 (I988).
Bernstein, L.S., Wormhoudt, J.e., and Conant, J.A., "The Aerodyne Radiation Code (ARC): Physical
Assumptions and Mathematical Approximations," Aerodyne Research, Inc. , ARI-RR-173, July 1979.
Howes, W.L., "Rainbow Schlieren and its Applications," Applied Optics, 23, 2449-2460 (1984).
Buchele, D.R., Griffin, D.W., "A Compact Color Schlieren Optical System," submitted to Applied Optics.
Greenberg, P.S., KJimek, R.B., Buchele, D.R. , "Quantitative Rainbow Schlieren DeOectometry," In preparation
for submission to Applied Optics.
Klimek, R.B., Paulick, M.J., "Color Image Processing and Object Tracking Workstation," NASA TM-105561,
April 1992.
Wernet, M.P., Edwards, R.V., "~ew Space Domain Processing for Pulsed Laser Anemometry," Applied Optics,
29,3399-3417 (1990).
Wernet, M.P., "Particle Displacement Tracking Applied to Air Flows," Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Laser Anemometry and Applications, Cleveland, OH, Aug. 5-9, 1991.
NASA Contract C-76847-R; EG &G Canada. Ltd.
Edwards, R.V ., Toole, P.M., "Optimal Signal Processi ng for the Laser Doppler Velocimeter," Submitted to the
Optical Society of America Topical Meeting on Photon Correlation and Scattering, Boulder, CO, Aug 24-26,
1992.
Dobbins, R.A., Megaridis, e.M., "Morphology of Flame Generated Soot as Determined by Therrnophoretic
Sampling," Langmuir. 3, 245 (1987) .
Melton, L.A., "Quantitative Use of Exciplex-Based Vapor-Liquid Visualization System (A Users Manual)," Final
Report for Contract DAAL03-86-K-0082 (1988).
NASA Contract NAS3-26547, United Technologies Research Center.
Ross, H.D., "NASA 's Microgravity Combustion Science and Fire Safety Programs," Proceedings of the Second
International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Sept. 1992.

66

-

PRIORITIES FOR MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION RESEARCH AND GOALS
FOR WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
Gerard M. Faeth
Department of Aerospace Engineering
The Un iversity of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2140

Introduction
Several concerns motivate fundamental combustion research: combustion-generated pollutants are
re-emerging as a major problem, new combustion technologies are needed for effective energy
utilization, municipal and hazardous waste incineration are needed to replace landfills and storage,
new combustion technologies are needed for advanced aircraft and spacecraft propulsion systems,
and current understanding of fires and explosion hazards is limited - particularly for space-craft
environments. Thus, it is of interest to determine how experimentation using micro gravity
facilities can advance research relevant to these problems.
Effects of buoyancy have had an enormous negative impact on the rational development of
combustion science. Thus, microgravity (~g) offers a potential breakthrough in combustion
research capabilities that could be comparable to the impact of laser diagnostics and numerical
computations in recent years. On the other hand, human operations in spacecraft involve flresafety issues at ~g that largely are unexplored. Thus, ~g offers both unusual opponunities and
unusual challenges to combustion science. The objectives of this paper are to highlight the
intrusion of buoyancy on fundamental combustion studies, the current priorities of microgravity
combustion program and the goals of this workshop. The present discussion is brief, see several
recent reviews of aspects of ~g combustion research for more details (1-6].

Intrusion of Buoyancy
The intrusion of buoyancy is a greater impediment to combustion than most other areas of science
because density changes caused by chemical reaction initiate buoyant flows that vastly complicate
both the execution and interpretation of measurements. Thus, the presence of gravity prevents
some fundamental phenomena - most laminar one-dimensional premixed and diffusion flames,
low Reynolds number heterogeneous flames, flame spread in dispersed heterogeneous media. etc.
- from being observed at all. Perv~rsely, problems of buoyancy are greatest for fundamental
laboratory experiments where good temporal and spatial resolution are needed; few practical
combustion phenomena are dominated by effects of buoyancy.
The limitations of buoyancy on combustion studies have been quantified using phenomenological
theories [4-6). For example, for effects of buoyancy to be small in a motionless combustion
environment at atmospheric pressure, the dimensions of the flame should be no larger than 100
~m; unfortUnately, it is not possible to resolve experiments on such scales using either existing or
anticipated combustion apparatus and instrumentation [4-6). Experiments at subatmospheric
pressures can inCrease allowable flame sizes, and this has been exploited in the past, however, the
available range is limited due to low reaction rates leading to extinction at low pressures, see [6]
and references cited therein.

67

----

Experiments in the presence of flow velocities offer a way of circumventing buoyancy effects,
however, relatively large velocities must be used causing spatial resolution problems similar to
those just discussed, and problems with approaching limiting conditions where either combustion
rates or flow velocities are small. Thus, for effects of buoyancy to be small for premixed flames,
at atmospheric pressure, laminar flame speeds should be greater than 1 mls [4-6]. This prevents
approaching flammability limits without effects of buoyant motion, which is problematical because
premixed flames are unusually responsive to stretch induced by gas motion near limits [7].
Similarly, nonpremixed flames should have characteristic Reynolds numbers of 100 or more to
avoid effects of buoyancy at atmospheric pressure [4-6]. This prevents approach to the low
Reynolds number Stokes flow regime that has been invaluable for understanding fluid mechanics.
The effect of buoyancy is so ubiquitous that we generally do not appreciate the enormous negative
impact that it has had on the rational development of combustion science. For example, aside from
limited exploratory work at !lg conditions, we have never observed the most fundamental
processes of combustion without substantial disturbances of buoyancy. This includes simple onedimensional configurations and low Reynolds number flows that have been invaluable in other
areas of science. Thus, buoyancy prevents the rational merging of theory, where buoyancy
frequently is of little interest, and experiments, which always are contaminated by effects of
buoyancy at nonnal gravity (ng) .
Turbulent flames , one of the most important unresolved problems of combustion science, provides
a graphic example of how buoyancy impedes the parallel development of theory and experiment.
Three-dimensional time-dependent numerical simulations provide a rational way to study some
phenomena of turbulence but the calculations only will be tractable at low Reynolds numbers for
some time to come [8]. Unfonunately, such conditions cannot be duplicated in the laboratory at ng
because buoyancy immediately accelerates any low-speed initial condition into a high Reynolds
number flow . Similar problems abound for other imponant combustion problems, e.g., the
combustion of sprays and particles due to problems of phase separation, etc. With no massive
breakthrough in computer technology in the offing, combustion experiments at !lg offer the most
promising approach toward resolving this theoreticaVexperimental dichotomy of combustion
SCIence.

Spacecraft Fire Safety
T he same features that make !lg attractive for fundamental combustion experiments introduce
hazards of fires and explosions that have no counterpan on earth. The main concern is that
virtually all existing information concerning design procedures to control fires and explosions is
based on experience at ng. Even current qualification procedures for materials used in space
involve tests at ng, justified by rather limited measurements at !lg [3]. Since we know that
combustion processes are very different at ng and ~g, there is little basis for confidence that this
practice is correct. Additionally, excessive caution to reflect our poor understanding of ~g fire
environments can unduly restrict our capabilities for exploiting space [3].
Addressing spacecraft fire safety concerns at ~g will require a substantial research effon.
Curiously, an alternative that could eliminate many of these concerns has not received much
attention. This involves the use of fire-safe attnospheres in spacecraft, similar to the methods used
to avoid fires in undersea systems [9] . This potential exists because fire-related phenomena tend to
be functions of the fractional amount of oxygen in the atmosphere while human comfon and
performance mainly depend on the absolute amount of oxygen in the attnosphere. Thus, it may be
possible to find a composition for spacecraft atmospheres that will not suppon combustion but will
suppon normal human activities indefinitely. However, available information concerning fire-safe
aunospheres - combustion properties at ~g, the performance and health of humans and other
biological systems, and potential impacts on spacecraft design and operation - are woefully

68

inadequate in view of the importance of this selection. Thus, fire-safe atmospheres appear to merit
a broad-based interdisciplinary research program due to their potential impact on future human
activities in space.
Current Priorities for Micromvity Combustion Research
An objective of this workshop is to identify priority areas within combustion science where
micro gravity-based investigations are needed. Based on the results of the First International
Microgravity Combustion Workshop, the Discipline Working Group (DWG) that advises NASA
in the area of micro gravity combustion science has set the following priorities: (1 ) turbulent
reacting flows; (2) heterogeneous combustion such as droplets, particles, slurries, solid fuels and
pools of liquid fuels; and (3) laminar homogeneous combustion phenomena such as ignition,
fiarneholding, t1ammability limits, flame instabilities, and diffusion flames. Prioritization also was
made with respect to applications, with spacecraft fire safety selected as the single most important
application area.
The current microgravity combustion science program only reflects these priorities with respect to
relevance to spacecraft fire safety, with the bulk of the work associated with heterogeneous
combustion. This status is summarized in T able 1. In this table , flight studies denote
investigations that are candidates for experimentation in space. Other studies either use groundbased IJ.g facilities, such as drop towers and aircraft flying parabolic trajectories, or are theoretical
studies. The relatively few studies of turbulent combustion is surprising in view of the current
high priority of this area. In contrast, seven flig ht studies and 18 total studies are related to
spacecraft fIre safety, implying a strong response to this priority area following the last NASA
Research Announcement (NRA) in 1989.
Table 1 Current Microgravity Combustion Science Program

Priority

J

3

Flight
Studies

Area

Turbulent Reacting Flows
Heterogeneous Combustion
Laminar Homogeneous Flames

1

7
2

Total
Studies
'"l

j

19
6

Goals for W orlcshop Discussions
As the microgravity combustion science program develops both the priorities and the focus of the
research program will change. Thus, an objective of the workshop is to highlight areas where
changes shoulq be encouraged. Some questions that might be addressed during the discussions
are as follows:

l.

Are the areas and priorities selected by the DWG appropriate?

2.

Are there new areas, e.g., combustion synthesis, metal combustion, etc., that merit emphasis
in the next NRA?

3.

What should be done to improve the content and balance of the flight and ground-based
programs. and of experimental and theoretical programs?

L_

69

4.

Should a major interdisciplinary research program on spacecraft fIre-safe atmospheres be
recommended and what should be the combustion component of any such program?

S.

Does the present program adequately address fundamental research issues relevant to
spacecraft fire safety?

Funding is competitive within the micrograviry combustion science program, and perhaps more
importantly , between this program and other research areas of interest to NASA and other
government agencies. Thus. an active high-quality rnicrogravity combustion science program is
required to assure continuing funding levels - much less increases. This workshop is one step in
developing such a program; therefore, lively and productive discussions here will be a valuable
service to the field of combustion.
Acknowled~ements

Helpful inputs from the NASA Microgravity Combustion Science Discipline Working Group are
gratefully acknowledged.
References
1.

"Microgravity Combustion Science: A Program Overview;" NASA TM 101424, 1989.

2.

"Microgravity Combustion Science: Progress, Plans and Opponunities," NASA TM 105410,
1992.

3.

Sacksteder. K .. Twenty-Third Symposiwn (Imernarional) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute , Pittsburgh, 1990, pp. 1589-1596.

4.

Law, c.K. , AlAA Paper No. 90-0120, 1990.

S.

Faeth. G.M .. AlAAfIKI Microgravity Science Symposium. Moscow, AlAA. Washington.
1991, pp. 281-293.

6.

Law, C.K. and Faeth , G.M .. "Opportunities and Challenges of Combustion in
Micrograviry. " in preparation, 1992.

7.

Kwon, S., Tseng, L.-K. and Faeth, G.M., Combust. Flame, Vol. 90, 1992, pp. 230-246.

8.

Pope, S.B., Twenty-Third Symposiwn (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1990, pp. 591-612.

9.

Gann, R.G., Stone, J.P., Tatem, P.L., Williams, F.W. and Carhart, H.W., Combust. Sci .
Technol., Vol. 18, 1978, pp. 155-163.

70

COMMENTS
Question (Takashi Kashiwagi, NlST): (1) I am not sure th at a name-limited, atmosp lll.:ric ,lflp rl1 ;ldl removes
lire problems in a spacecraft entirely. Smoldering under certain conditions. such as wL:i1 insuLlkd and
preheated cases, can continue even in several percen t of 0 2' It see ms to me as long as t hl'rt': is m<tnned
!light there are lire safety issues.
(2) I should lik e to see clearly delin ed policy in which the combustilln rt:search areas n.:I;ltctl tll lin.: research
could be considered in Microgravitv Science Program .
Answer: Fire-safe atmospheres to el iminate conventional unwanted fires would represent a suhst:tn ti al
imp rovement of fire safety in spJcecraft. Whether this can be achieved. and the contlitillns nl'elkd to
prevent smol dering in microgravity. are open issues at this tim e that clearly mcrit further st ud y. Your second
com ment relales to NASA policy issues, however; my und crstanding is that relationship ur , tUlliL- , in the
microgravity combustion program to spacecraft lire safety is a stro ng point in establ ishin g th c rL·J..:vance of
the research.
Ouest ion (Fred Dryer, Princeton U ni"ersity): 1\1 Y coml11ent dea ls wit h priorit ii'.at ion III III icr(1~r;II ' it y scie nce
to pract ica l lire safety prob lems. Fire safety stand a rds regarding the permissible cllllcC lllratillns IIi" Ilammablc
gases and li quids are typically rcfe rred to about LO% of th e lea n limit. a ,·,t!ue which apparc ntil' \\ ill change
little from absence or presence of gral"i ty. This docs not mean that the science oj jbllllll<thility limits is not
important to understand. only th at its outcome may have lillie impact in the lirc safcty arc n.\. ()11 thc other
hand. limiting oxygen index apparcntlv changes by as much as a factor oi" 2. an absolute chan!!c Pi" substantial
consequence to defining (lire) inert atmosph eres. Finally, on Eart h therc is no cxpcricnCl: with tin.:
fl amm ab ilit y characteristics of wide-range polydispe rse ae rosols. a li kely acrnso l character in Illinllgravity
con ditio ns.
In addition to the smolderi ng probl em (which must be mat e ri als-controlled and studied) . thc 1 (r two areas
;ltt
of microgravity co mbusti on sc ie ncc would appear to me to bc mu ch highcr priority than llallllll<thility limits.
A nswer: My reference to tlall1mabilit~· limit s. in connection wi th fire- safc atmosphLn:s. \\';I~ mL·:tnl to he
gene ric and nol related 10 a spec ifi c cr it eri on lik e th e lea n ll amm;lbility limit llr thc limiling ll... \"~~l" n inuex.
Your point is well take n that th e crite ri a to be used will inllu cnce the dclinition or jilc-~;t1e ;Itlllll"pheres.
Clearly. the research issues in thi s area mu st in vo k e both the n<tlure and criteria i"or lire -~; Irc ;ttlllllsphc res.
()uestion (A. (illITICZ. Yale Uni\ 'e r s it~"): On e of th e id c ntificd priority are;ls is th;1l 01 tlll hulcnt IT acting
Ilows. Would you agree that bcfore this research area can bcn cfit rrom Illicrogra"itv experilllcl1l:ttion, we
should wait ror suhsta ntial imprm'cmc nt O il ava il;th lc diagnosti c tcchl1iqu cs"i
Answer: No, I see no reason to wait for improved diagnostics in order to address problcms li t turhulent
reacting Oows. First of all, available instrumentation at this point is equivalent tn methods mcd to develop
much of ou r understand ing of turbulent llames. Next, th e environment itself. which allows turhulent-like
name processes to proceed at much smaller velocities than on Earth, provides new potential rllr conve ntional
experimental methods. Fi nally, I hes itate to exclude the possibili ty of some new approach heing developed
from available lechnolof,'Y.

71

FULLERENES FORMATION IN FLAMES
Jack B. Howard
Department of Chemical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

In trod uction
Fullerenes are composed of carbon atoms arranged in approximately spherical or
ellipsoidal cages resembling the geodesic domes designed by Buckminster Fuller, after
whom the molecules were named!. The approximately spherical fullerene, which
resembles a soccer ball and contains . sixty carbon atoms (C60 ) , is called
The fullerene containing seventy carbon atoms (C,o) is
buckminsterfullerene.
approximately ellipsoidal, similar to a rugby ball. Fullerenes were first detected in 1985,
in carbon vapor produced by laser evaporation of graphitel . The closed shell structure,
which has no edge atoms vulnerable to reaction, was proposed to explain the observed
high stability of certain carbon clusters relative to that of others at high temperatures
and in the presence of an oxidizing gas.
The proposed structure remained unconfirmed until 1990, when samples large
enough for spectroscopy were produced by vaporization of graphite rods with resistive
heating under inert atmosphere2 • This method was quickly adopted in several research
groups3-5 and in small new companies. Fullerene samples soon became available, and
the pace of research accelerated to an intense level. The interest rapidly expanded to
include a still growing list of molecular and crystalline properties of fullerenes, as well
as fullerenes with metals and other elements inside the cages, and fullerenes with
hydrogen, oxygen, methyl, methylene, phenyl, or other functional groups or cross-links.
The suggested potential applications for fullerenes include superconductors,
lubricants, catalysts, high energy fuels, polymers and biomaterials. The chemistry of
fullerenes formation is being studied to provide a basis for the design and operation of
fullerene synthesis reactors, and for the identification of new fullerene types and
derivatives.
The possibility that fullerenes may be formed in sooting flames was
suggested6-9 early in fullerenes research. Zang et a1. 6 considered the possible role of
carbon shell structures in the formation and morphology of soot. Kroto and McKay7
described a carbon nucleation scheme involving quasi-icosahedral spiral shell carbon

Preceding Page Blank
73
-

~-.--

J

particles, and suggested it may apply t:) soot. Curl and Smalley suggested that carbon
nets in the form of spiral structures may be important to soot formation in flames .
Recent reviews of these concepts are given by Kroto et a1. 10- 12
All-carbon ions having charge/mass raL:JS similar to those reported for
fullerenes in graphite vaporization were observed by Homann et alY-1 using on-line
5
molecular beam/ mass spectrometric probing of low-pressure premixed benzene-oxygen
and acetylene-oxygen flames . Iijirna 16 published an electron micrograph of a soot particle
in which a circular feature was interpreted to be evidence of a fullerene . Malhotra and
7
Ross 1 using field ionization mass spectrometry studied several soots from pyrolysis and
combustion processes but found no peaks corresponding to fullerenes .
The presence of C 60 and C70 fullerenes in substantial quantities was reported from
spectroscopic analysis of samples collected from low-pressure premixed benzene-oxygen
8 9.
flames at MIT 1 ,1 The presence and group behavior of high molecular weight
compounds having molecular-weights up to about 1000 g/mole in benzene-oxygen
flames had been studied earlier at MIT using molecular-beam sampling with on-line
mass spectrometri°.21 as well as probe collection of condensible material including soot
with subsequent analysis by solvent extraction and other methods 22 • Intriguing but
inconclusive evidence of the presence of fullerenes had been seen from both on-line mass
spectra21 and exploratory fast atom bombardment mass spectra of collected samples23 •
.23
8
The presence of fullerenes in these flames was finally established1 ,19, soon after the
discoveri and early implementation3-S of the graphite vaporization process for
producing macroscopic quantities of fullerenes . The same solvent extraction and
spectroscopic techniques employed in the graphite vaporization studies were applied
successfully in the study of the flame samples.
The knowledge of fullerenes formation in fl ames has grown significantly during
the short time since this process w as first established. The effects of combustion
conditions on the distribution and yields of C60 and C70 fullerenes have been studied and
the amount of fullerenes formed at different distances or times through the reaction zone
of selected flames has been measured. Flame synthesis is found to offer not only an
alternative method for large scale fullerenes production, but an ability to control the
distribution of products (e.g., the C;o/C 60 ratio) over a larger range than previously
realized. Also, a range of fullerenes including metastable isomers can be produced in
flames 24 • Plausible mechanisms of fullerenes formation in flames have been proposed
an d subjected to preliminary kinetics testing against data 25 . These advances are
summarized below.
Current Knowledge
Fullerenes can be synthesized in substantial quantities in flames . Most of the
research on fullerenes formation in flames has been performed with subatmospheric
pressure, laminar, premixed flames of benzene and oxygen, with or without an inert

74

I

I

..J

diluent gas, but acetylene has also been used successfully. The following conclusions
about yields and products refer to the use of benzene fuel.
The largest yields of fullerenes are produced in sooting flames, but not under the
most heavily sooting conditions. The largest conversion of carbon to soot is about 12%
in fullerene forming flames, but the largest yields and production rates of fullerenes are
observed when about 2-3% of the carbon is converted to soot. Small yields of fullerenes
are formed in nonsooting flames near the critical conditions for . impending soot
forma tion.
The largest yield of C60+~O as a percentage of soot is 20%, observed at a pressure
of 37.5 torr, a C/O atomic ratio of 0.959 and 25% helium. The largest C60+~O yield on
a basis of percentage of carbon fed is about 0.5%, and the largest C 60 +c,o production rate
(g/hr) was observed at a pressure of 69 torr, a C/O ratio of 0.989 and 25% helium.
The C70 /C60 molar ratios observed under different flame conditions are in the
range 0.26-8.8, compared to 0.02-0.18 for the graphite vaporization method. The ratio
is typically 1.5 to 1.8 for the flame conditions of largest C60 +C 70 production rates and
yields. The largest values of this ratio are observed under conditions where the fullerene
yields and production rates are relatively low.
The ability to promote the yield of certain products by adjustment of flame
conditions apparently extends to larger fullerenes, based on exploratory work with
solvents suitable for large fullerenes.
Isomers of fullerene C 60 are produced in varying amounts in flames under
different conditions. Although the isomers' structures are not yet known in detail, they
necessarily must include abutting five-membered rings, which have previously been
assumed to be avoided because of their high strain energy. Many of the isomers are
thermally metastable, the C60 isomers having a half-life of 1 hr in toluene at 111°C.
Flame derived fullerenes also include isomers of C70, C 600, C700, C761 C84I ~ and
~41 and many hydrogen-containing complexes such as CwI-I2I CwI-I41 C7oH2' [C60 (CH 2)(H2)]
or [C 6o (H)(CH3)], and others.
Fullerenes in flames are formed in the presence of hydrogen and oxygen as well
as carbon. The formation of fullerenes is the net result of formation and destruction
reactions, and the fullerenes concentration profile exhibits a peak at lower C/O ratios
but become monotonically increasing with distance from the burner as the C/O ratio is
increased. The formation of fullerenes in sooting flames occurs several milliseconds later
than soot formation.
Fullerenes formation in flames is a molecular weight growth process analogous
to the formation of PAH and soot but involving curved and hence strained structures.
75

A detailed mechanism of the formation of Coo and C 70 fulleren es in flames has been
constructed based on the types of reactions already used in describing PAH and soot
growth, but including intramolecular rearrangements and other reactions needed to
describe the evolution of the unique structural features of the fullerenes .
Potential for Microgravity Research
Potential topics for micro gravity research include fullerenes formation in both
diffusion premixed and laminar premixed flames. In the case of diffusion flames,
experiments under microgravity conditions would complement measurements at 1 gin
determining the effect of laminar flame structure on the extent of production of the well
known C w and C 70 fullerenes, and on the formation of novel fullerenes . In addition, the
measurements would permit preliminary projections of the prospects for fullerenes
synthesis in turbulent diffusion fl ames. Measurements in premixed flames under
microgravity conditions would allow the extent of C w and C 70 formation and the
formation of novel fullerenes to be studied under conditions where the behavior is
already well known except for the effect of gravity.
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to M.K Chung, A.G. Dietz III, L.M. Giovane, D.G.
Goldenson, M .E. Johnson, RJ. Juba, Jr., A.L. Lafleur, Y. Makarovsky, S. Mitra, M.D.
N ystrom, c.J. Pope, L.W. Theiss, and T.K Yadav for valuable collaboration and/or
laboratory work; to the Division of Chemical Sciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences,
Office of Energy Research, U.s. Department of Energy, for financial support under grant
No. DE-FG02-84ER13282; and to the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
fo r analytical support under Center Grant EHS-SP30-ES02109-10 and Program Grant
EHS-SP01-ES01640-11 .
References
1.

Kroto, H.W., Heath, J.R, O'Brien, S.c., Curl, RF., and Smalley, RE.:
Nature 318, 162 (1985).

2.

Kratschmer, W., Lamb, L.D., Fostiropoulos, K, and Huffman, D.R: Nature
347, 354 (1990).

3.

Taylor, R, Hare, J.P., Abdul-Sada, A.K., and Kroto, H.W.: J. Chern. Soc.,
Chern. Commun., 1423-1425 (1990).

4.

Ajie, H., Alvarez, M.M., Anz, S.J., Beck, RD ., Diederich, F., Fostiropoulos,
K., Huffman, D.R, Kratschmer, W., Rubin, Y., Schriver, KE., Sensharma,
D., and Whetten, RL.: J. Phys. Chern. 94, 8630 (1990).

76

5.

Haufler, R.E., Conceicao, J., Chibante, L.P.F., Chai, Y., Byrne, N .E.,
Flanagan,S., Haley, M.M., O'Brien, S.C, Pan, C, Xiao, Z., Billups, W.E.,
Ciufolini, M.A., Hauge, RH., Margrave, J.L., Wilson, L.J., Curl, RF., and
Smalley, RE.: J. Phys. Chern. 94, 8634 (1990).

6.

Zhang, Q.L., O'Brien, S.C, Heath, J.R, Liu, Y., Curl, RF., Kroto, H .W., and
Smalley, R.E.: J. Phys. Chern. 90,525 (1986).

7.

Kroto, H.W. and McKay, K: Nature 331, 328 (1988).

8.

Curl RF. and Smalley, R E.: Science 242, 1017 (1988).

9.

Kroto, H.W.: Science 242, 1139 (1988).

10.

Kroto, H.W., Allaf, A.W., and Balm, S.P.: Chern. Rev. 91, 1213 (1 991).

11.

Kroto, H.W.: J. Chern. Soc. Faraday Trans. 87 (18), 2871 (1991 ).

12.

Kroto, H.W.: Angew. Chern. Int. Ed. Eng!. 31, 111 (1992).

13.

Gerhardt, Ph., Loffler, S., and Homann, KH. : Chern. Phys. Lett. 137, 306
(1987).
Gerhardt, Ph., Loffler, S., and Homann, KH.: Twenty-Second Symposium
(International) on Combustion, p . 395, The Combustion Institute, 1989.

14.

15.

Loffler, S. and Hom ann, KH.: Twenty-Third Symposium (International)
on Combustion, p. 355, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1991.

16.

Iijima, S.: J. Phys. Chern. 91, 3466 (1987).

17.

Malhotra, R and Ross, 0.5.: J. Phys. Chern. 95, 4599 (1991) .

18.

Howard, J. B., McKinnon, J.T., Makarovsky, Y , Lafleur, A.L., and Johnson,
M.E.: Nature 352, 139 (199 1).

19.

McKinnon, J.T., Bell, M.W., and Barkley, RM.: Combustion and Flame 88,
102 (1992).

20.

Bittner, J.D. and Howard, J.B.: Eighteenth Symposium (International) on
Combustion, p. 110, The Combustion Institute, 1981.

21.

Howard, J.B. and Bittner, J.D.: Soot in Combustion Systems and Its Toxic
Properties (J. Lahaye and G. Prado, Eds.), pp. 57-91 , Plenum, 1983.

77

--------

22.

McKinnon, J.T. : Ph.D. Thesis, MIT (1989).

23.

Pope, c.J.: M.S. Thesis, MIT (1988).

24.

Anacleto, J.F., Perreault, H., Boyd, R.K., Pleasance, S., Quilliam, M.A.,
Sim, P.G., Howard, J. B., Makarovsky, Y., and Lafleur, A.L.: Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectroscopy 6, 214 (1992).

25.

Pope, c.J.: Thesis, MIT (in preparation).

I
I
I
I

I

I

78

COMMENTS
Question (G.M. Faeth, University of Michigan: You mostly discussed Fullerenes formation in premixed
names . Have there been corresponding studies in nonpremixed names?
Answer: I know of no published studies of Fullerenes formation in diffusion names. Such studies would be
of much interest, given the contrasts between the diffusion and premixed name structures .

..
79

PRINCIPLES OF GAS PHASE PROCESSING OF CERAMICS
DURING COMBUSTION
Michael R. Zachariah
Chem ical Science and Technology Laboratory
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899

Introduction
In recent years, ceramic materials have found applications in an increasingly wider range of industrial
processes, where their unique mechanical, electrical and optical properties are exploited [1]. Ceramics are
especially useful for applications in high temperature, corrosive environments, which impose particularly
stringent requirements on mechanical reliability. One approach to provide such materials is the manufacture
of submicron (and more recently nanometer scale) particles, which may subsequently be sintered to produce
a material with extremely high mechanical integrity. However, high quality ceramic materials can only be
obtained if particles of known size, polydispersity, shape and chemical purity can be produced consistently,
under well controlled conditions. These requirements are the fundamental driving force for the renewed
interest in studying particle formation and growth of such materials.

Flames have most commonly been viewed as a means for generating energy; however, under some
circumstances, they have also been used as an environment for chemical synthesis. The most notable
industrial examples are the synthesis of carbon black, titanium dioxide and silica [2]. Some of the earliest
work on the characterization of particle formation of refractories in flames was conducted by Ulrich [3] .
Their work focused on the agglomeration processes following the formation of silica particles. More
recently Calcote and his coworkers have used a generic novel halogen-alkali metal exchange reaction to
generate a combustion environment in which the products are either a bare metal or a ceramic (and the
halogen-alkali metal salt) [4].
For multi-component compounds where chemical stoichiometry is particularly important, aerosol
decomposition is favored. Here, solutions containing the components are reacted within each aerosol
droplet, precluding the necessity of controlling multi-component nucleation. Zachariah and Huzarewicz
have shown that one can produce high Tc superconducto rs in a flame by this method [5].
The objective of this paper is not to review the field but to highlight from this authors prospective the most
important areas features/factors affecting the growth of ceramic/semiconductor materials from the vapor. In
this paper I will review the work on going at NIST on the vapor phase synthesis (gas phase
chemistry/nucleation) of submicron and nano-phase particles from the prospective of the fundamental
controlling factors and how they might be manipulated to obtain optimum properties.
Ideal Powder Charact eristics for Adyanced Ceramics
Based on current understanding the most important features in a powder are listed [6]:
Particle size below 1 j.1Il1 diameter. nanophase powders < 100 nm.
Broad panicle size distribution for greater packing density and less sintering shrinkage.
Equiaxed particle shape for highest packing density
Chemical and Phase purity/stability
No Powder defects (e.g. agglomerates)
They negate all the above benefits!
From the prospective of "ideal" powder processing, agglomeration is the most serious issue which must be
addressed in any synthesis process.

81

Model System Stydies of vapor Phase Synt hesis in Com b y stion
In order to better understand the controlling factors underlying the vapor phase formation of ceramic
compounds we have undertaken to study one model system in great detail. The system chosen was the
fonnation of SiO x particles. Here particles are fonned from silane and silane like precursors in a counter
propagating diffusion flame reactor, illustrated in Fig. 1. The details of the reactor geometry can be found
elsewhere [7,8]. The two impinging jets create a classical stagnation plane, offset from which (on the
oxidizer side) a flame can be stabilized. The flame acts as a heat and radical source to aid in the pyrolysis
and oxidation of the precursor (added to the fuel stream). The advantage of this geometry, in a similar
fashion to other more traditional combustion studies is that along the stagnation streamline the flow may be
described as one dimensional, greatly simplifying the data analysis and modeling complexity.

Studies of the Particle Phase
In-situ light scattering studies in conjunction with aerosol dynamics modeling have been employed to
characterize particle growth under a wide variety of process conditions (temperature, precursor
concentration, strain rate, etc) [7,9].
The basic conclusions to be reached from these studies were that:
- Precursor concentration was the primary variable for controlling particle size.
- Under most operating conditions the particles fonned are chained agglomerates composed of primary
particles in the 10-30 om regime.
- In-situ particle characterization based on light scattering showed average agglomerate sizes which ranged
from as low as 50 om up to 150 om.
- Temperature was the primary variable for controlling particle morphology. Increasing flame temperature
resulted in panicle sintering and therefore more spherical shapes. At the highest flame temperatures used (T
> 2500K) particles were completely coalesced with mean sized in the 50-100om range. Sintering could be
observed to occur from both light scattering and TEM studies.
- Modeling of panicle growth employed both moment and sectional aerosol dynamics [10] . By using a
temperature dependent source rate for the monomer (Si0 2 ) and applying a bi-coUider kinetic scheme, one
can without having to resort to classical nucleation theory adequately model the overall features of particle
growth. Fig 2. shows a comparison of experiment and theory for both particle size and number density. It
is clear that one can, using a kinetically constrained approach, model both the size and number density. The
calculation also shows a good prediction of the onset of nucleation. Particle size distribution can be
significantly penurbed from self-preserving during the early stages of particle growth when the monomer
generation rate is high, but quickly evolves to the self-preserving distribution during the relevant flow times
of most flames.

Studies of the Gas Phase
In any materials syntheses, morphology (size. shape) is only a part of the final characteristics that need to be
controlled. Issues related to phase, chemical composition and crystallinity are also of interest. In order to
address these issues it is necessary to develop or borrow methods for chemical characterization and
modeling relevant to understanding the chemistrytnuclcation that might occur. Characterization of the gas
phase has been conducted using in-situ optical probes throughout the reactor during panicle fonnation, for
temperature (thennocouple, OH fluorescence), and gas phase/cluster species (laser induced fluorescence
(LIF) and resonantly erthanced multi-photon ionization (REMPI» [11-13].
These measurements have been made in conjunction with a chemical model, which includes gas phase
hydrogen-oxygen chemistry, silane pyrolysis and oxidation chemistry (proposed). The gas phase portion of
the mechanism contains at the present time 38 chemical species and 128 reversible chemical reactions. In
addition, there are 31 nucleation reactions which remove species from the gas phase, through what amount
to monomer reactions (e.g. Si02 + Si0 2 monomer). Added to this, 23 species undergo surface chemistry

82

directly from the gas phase onto the growing aerosol, via a CVD type mechanism (e.g. Si0 2 + surface)
[14]. The chemical kinetics are solved in conjunction with a model for the counter flow geometry developed
by Smooke et al [15]
Measurement of gas phase species made by either LIF or REMPI include Si, SiH3, SiO and OH [I I, I 4 J.
As an example, we show in Fig. 3 concentration profiles for SiO made by LIF for various levels of silane
loading. Also shown is the stagnation plane as defined by the steep decline in the scanered light from
particles. To the right of the stagnation plane (ie where no particles are present) the SiO concentration is
independent of the silane concentration initially used. This behavior is accounted for by considering that as
the temperature is increasing for particles approaching the stagnation point, the equilibrium vapor pressure
of SiO over a solid is also increasing. At the stagnation point, when all particulate surfaces are removed, the
remaining gas phase SiO diffuses across the stagnation plane and is therefore independent of the silane
concentration used. Of more interest to us is the region where SiO is sensitive to the amount of silane
injected. This region also corresponds to the particle forming zone in the flow field. It is clear that the SiO
concentration goes up with increased silane concentration. In addition, the appearance of SiO occurs later in
the flow with increased addition of silane.
The mechanism has been tested against measurements of the OH radical made by LIF and allow us some
confidence in the reliability of modeling the general features of the flame. The calculated SiO profiles are
shown in Figure 4. The results show that the location and magnitude of the SiO concentration can be
calculated quite well. The dominant channels ( as determined from post-processing the simulation) for the
chemistry are shown in Figure 5. The primary consumption route for silane is the unimolecular pyrolysis to
silylene (SiH 4 = SiH 2 + H2), which in tum may react with silane to form di, tri silanes. This process
occurs under experimental conditions when silane is injected in the larger quantities ( >0.25 mole %). It is
also the manner in which silicon particles are observed to nucleate in silicon CVD reactors. On the oxidation
side of our mechanism we know from our simulations that no molecular oxygen remains in the particle
forming zone, having been consumed by the flame. Furthermore, we know from our OH measurement (
not shown here) that OH is not in sufficient quantity in the particle zone to participate in significant
oxidation. We are therefore left with concluding that H 20 is the primary donor of oxygen to silicon. The
most likely candidate is SiH2. In order to address this point we have recently undertaken ab-initio molecular
orbital (MO) calculations to show that water will insert to yield both the silicon analogues of methanol and
formaldehyde (H3SiOH, H2SiO) [16]. RRKM analysis has been used to obtain rates from these
calculations which indicate (see Fig 5) that these channels will be important. Once we have H2SiO, the large
concentration of H atoms created in the flame and which have diffused into the particle forming zone
successively dehydrogenate to produce SiO or alternatively undergo unimolecular decomposition to SiO and
H2.
One of the interesting points regarding nucleation is that Si02 is not formed in the gas phase and that solid
formation must proceed through the polymerization of SiO, HSiOOH, and H3SiOH with subsequent
oxidation in order to achieve full oxygenation. We have recently shown through MO calculation that the
polymerization of SiO is highly exothermic and proceeds without an activation barrier, however subsequent
oxidation to yield full oxidation is slow. This presents opportunity to make oxides with variable
stoichiometry. It is this multicomponent nature of gas to particle conversion that is the key to controlled
synthesis of nano-scale materials.
Another issue of importance is the dominant mode of particle growth. Based on the model calculation we
can show that heterogeneous growth of gas phase species will play only a minor role in the growth of
particles. This results from the fact that flame systems act as pulsed sources of monomer ( due to the large
gradients in temperature) which do not provide sufficient time for CVD growth to existing panicles. This
means that particle formation will always be dominated by new particle births in flames and will require
greater emphasis on quenching to prevent agglomeration [ 17]

Stydies of the Clyster Phase and Nano-Phase Materials
The bridge between gas phase species and the bulk soliciis what is euphemistically termed clusters. What
separates clusters from bulk species is that they have size dependent properties whish can differ
substantially from the corresponding property in the bulk. Depending on the property of interest (melting
temperature, optical properties, coordination number, etc.) the critical cluster size to obtain bulk properties

83

will in general be different. One interesti ng aspect of this is that one has the potential to tailor make materials
with a desired property, assuming one knows the size-propeny relationship and can control the
formation/collection of these structures.
In order to understand the growth of this class of materials we have undertaken molecular dynamics studies
of cluster growth processes [18 J. The basic idea is to solve the classical equations of motion for an
assembly of atoms based on known interaction potentials. Because the interaction potential surface is quite
well known for silicon, our studies to date have been limited to pure silicon clusters.
A representative example result of these calculations are presented in Fig 6. for the case of two 15 atom
silicon clusters (equilibrated with an internal temperature of 1850 K) colliding with a relative velocity of
2400 K. The oscillation of the relative velocity of the cluster results from the two body attractive and three
body repulsive parts of the interaction potential producing the initial stages of an agglomerate. The
potential energy curve shows the time evolution of the newly formed 30 atom cluster from the agglomerate
through to the coalesced sphere. The potential well at 0.2 ps corresponds to an agglomerate of the two
clusters. By climbing an energy barrier the clusters gain a tremendous amount of configuration stabilization
and thus much lower potential energy.The temperature profIle is essentially a mirror image of the potential
curve, showing the large self-heating of the cluster as the cluster finds a more stable configuration.
The relevance to nano-scale materials processing become clear when one realizes that the primary objectives
are to make small structures that have linle or no agglomeration. This can be accomplishes by either, (for
very small particles) forcing particles to cross over the barrier or (for larger particles) trapping them in the
agglomerate potential well by rapid cooling.
Potential for Microgravity Processing
Microgravity combustion environments provide the possibility to:
1. Increase residence time
2. Decrease the extent of thermal mixing

These two characteristics have the potential for providing processing conditions not easily achieved on the
ground and which in principle at least can be considered to provide an opportunity for further development.
Increased residence time could be applied to the problem of growth of very large particles ( microns) which
have importance in catalysis . One of the problems encountered in the growth of large particles is the
requirement of large residence times in order to vapor deposit onto the existing particle rather than
continuously forming new particles via homogeneous nucleation. The increased residence time will allow
for extendcd periods where heterogeneous chemistry CVD can take place under slow chemistry conditions.
The decrease in thermal mixing rates due to the lack of buoyancy driven flows has some potential in the
formation of extremel y fine particles (nanometer scale). As revealed from the experimental and molecular
dynamics models previously discussed, temperature plays a key role in the kinetics of agglomerate
formation/coalescence. Increasing temperature can cause complete or partial sintering given sufficient time.
Therefore with a judicious choice of time-temperature history, nanophase particles could be made to form
and then quickly quenched so that the agglomerates that are made are only weakly bound. Because of the
absence of buoyancy, thermal boundary layers can be maintained with steeper gradients for longer times,
allowing particles in a flame to be transported by electrophoretic or thermophoretic transport to a much
colder quench layer. In this way one can separate nucleation from agglomeration.
Cilllclusjons
Combustion synthesis has established its credentials as a practical method for the synthesis of fine ceramic
particles. Its future contribution will be determined by the ability to develop strategies for the formation of
particles with specific requirements for size, morphology and chemical composition.

84

References
1.
2.

Sanders. H.1 .. Chern. Eng. News. July 9. (I 984)
Ulrich, G.D., Chern. Eng. News. August 6 (1984)
Ulrich, G.D .• and Subranmanian, Combust. Sci. Tech. 17. 119. (1977)
Calcote, H.F., and Felder, W .• Twenty-Founh Symposium (International) on
Combustion, (1992)
Zachariah, M .R., and Huzarewicz, S., J. Mater. Res. Soc. 6.264. (1991)
Messing, G.L.. " Critical POwder Characteristics for Advanced Ceramics" to appear in
Fortschrittsberiichte der Deutschen Keramischen Gesselschaft.
Zachariah, M.R .. Chin. D., Semerjian. H.G., and Katz, J.L., Combust. Flame, 78,287
(19 89) .
Zachariah. M.R.. Chin D .• Katz. J.L.. and Semerjian. H.G., Applied Optics. 28.530
(1989)
Zachariah. M.R.. and Semerjian. H.G .• High. Temp. Sci .• 28. 113. 1990
Zachariah. M.R. and Semerjian. H.G .• AIChE J. 35. 2003 (1989)
Zachariah, M.R .• and R.G. Joklik. J. Appl. Phys. 68,311 (1990)
Zachariah. M.R.. and Burgess. D .. "Stratagies for Laser Excited Fluorescence During
Particle Formation" Submiued to 1. Aeros. Sci.
Zachariah. M.R., Ceramic Powder Science III. Ed. Messing. G .. 12.283 (1990)
Zachariah. M.R.. "Chemisuy of Silane Oxidation and Pyrolysis During Panicle Formation:
Comparison wi!h In-Situ Measurements", Western States Section of the Combustion
Instirute. March (1991)
Smooke. M.D .. Puri. LK., and Seshadri, K .. Twenty-tlrst Symposium (International) on
Combustion. pp. 1783. (198 6)
Zachariah. M.R.. and Tsang. W. "A b-Initio Molecular Orbital Calculations of some
Imponant Reactions and Polymerizations in lhe Si-O System .... Proceedings of !he
Materials Research Sociery. Boston. MA 1992
Zachariah. M.R., and Dimilriou. P .. J. Aeros. Sci. Tech .• 13,413 (1990)
B1aisten-Barojas. E .. and Zachariah. M.R., Phys. Rev. B.. 45.4403. (1992)

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
II.
12.
13.
14.

,5.
16.
17.
18.

_Lant
,

..

r----------------------- ~

1OM~

7.5

~

i
~

I

111"1t'

;

mm ~

101

~
...

I

b· _ _ _ MIIIIr

~

I-

::J

Z

=1ame

10-<

10-'

TIIIE/.1
T

L

0 -i
J(

- - - - - - - - - - , . -- - - - - - . . . . . : : . . . . -

Staonailon
?I.rne

101~,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -__

I

%

o

2.0;:
«
:>
\U
1.5~
a:
«

1.0 ~

..
'"
«

·7.5mm ...

I'
;

I

1~'-'_ _~-......_ _-..-,TTii..... .:...' ""r"1 '
1~

Figure 1. Schematic of counter flow diffusion flow
field; Particles fonned below stagnation plane.
Laser diagnostics along stagnation streamline.

10-<

111-1

,~

,~---- _ _ _ _

10.5

....
, ,-nil,..,,,_ _.....,',....,'~''''"''' 0
I
'I
10-'

101

Figure 2, Comparison of model and experiment of Si02
particle fonnatioo in a flame.

8S

T"D4W"AruaF: Uti
_
~

__

~,.,.

.-

1231...

?.sf

rU

1.11--"

'" ru

;::

0

Z

OL_

E=:
u
«

B ...

e: ..-~

~
0

:l!

---..

Z

I.e

0

101
....

1••

Vi

0
Vi

- - - -

...

SiO SIWUl....AnON:'SlH4 ... 000036
SoO 5.lIrof\..ILAT'()H.SiH4 _ 0 000 7 ~
510 SJWULATIOH:SiH4 ... 0 001 8

.- - StO

SI "'Ul.o\' IOH : ~.

_ 0

ocue

LI

J.a. ......

·7.2

-6.4

-3.15

-te
0 .0
tB
REACTOR AXIS (mml

3.6

6.4

7.2

-7.2

5 .4

-3 6

-1 6

00

18

30

REACT OR ,\ XIS ( m m)

Figure 3. LIF concentration measurement of SiO as a luncLion
SIH4 mole fraction. Particles fonn to the left of the stagnation plane.

DOMINANT GAS PHASE CHEMICAL PATHWAYS FOR
Sll.ICON DIOXIDFlPOLY -SILICON FORMATION

Figure 4. Model predictions of SiO concentration.

_ 11 00

E
~

a)

675

~

5 , ......

,-,--:-------~-_ ___.

If)

250

>~

>
SilI4

,-

+ SiJ-Q

/

~ · 600 !
~

S<2 Itl

- - - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~__~

I
~

o

5121-0

\

~

> · 175

5,2

/

~ SlllQ ~aJ

0 .5

1. 5

li me ( ps)

~

"0

+ SUi2

.§ · 1915
-; . 1920

t - - - - - - - -- - - - -. ,
r

~ b)
~ . '925 ~
~ . 1930 ~

E' · 1935 ~
~ · 1940 ~
~
:
_ · 1945 ~
I1l

r'

\)

,

:

~ - 1950 ~

~ ' 1955 0~'---- . 5-------,~--~1.5
O~

'it

Net Dinctioo

- - Partial Equlibrium

li me (ps)

225 0

(c)

£

213 8

~

Figure 5. Dominant pattbways computed from model
calculations for silane oxidation/pyrolysis

::I

iU 2025

~

E 1913

~

1800

Figure 6. Results from molecular dynamics computation for the collision
of two 15 atom silicon clusters for the relative (center of mass) velocity,
potential energy and temperature.

86

o

0. 5
I
l ime (ps)

1.5

COMMENTS
Question (Michael Frenklach, Penn State University): In addition to combustion synthesis in "regular" flames
(like laminar premixed or diffusion names), one can employ a "combined" name environment. For example,
using a microwave-assisted combustion, we were able to synthesize diamond particles in the gas phase.
Answer: I would agree completely that augmented names can provide a more nexiblc environment for
synthesis. Your diamond synthesis is a fine example of that principle. However, we should not lose sight of
the one great advantage "regular" names provide over other synthesis schemes -- "simplicity" -- which
translates into cost-effectiveness, the driver for most process development. As we move to augmcnted flames
through addition of energy (laser, RF, etc.) we transgress into a much more complicated synthesis
environment, and into direct competition with the myriad of other processing techniques that may provide a
similar result at comparable or lower cost.

87

,I

SESSION C - Diffusion Flames and Diagnostics
(Chair, Robert Santoro)

Preceding Page Blank

EFFECTS OF BUOYANCY ON LAMINAR, TRANSITIONAL, AND TURBULENT
GAS JET DIFFUSION FLAMES

*

M. Yousef Bahadori t
Science Applications International Corporation
Thermal Sciences Division
Torrance, California 90501-1724
Dennis P. Stocker,* David F. Vaughan,tt and Liming Zhou"
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
and
Raymond 8. Edelman§

Rockwell International Corporation
Rocketdyne Division
Canoga Park, California

Introduction
Gas jet diffusion flames have been a subject of research for many years. However, a better understanding of the
physical and chemical phenomena occurring in these flames is still needed, and, while the effects of gravity on the
burning process have been observed, the basic mechanisms responsible for these changes have yet (0 be determined.
The fundamental mechanisms that control the combustion process are in general coupled and quite complicated.
These include mixing, radiation, kinetics, soot formation and disposition, inertia, diffusion, and viscous effects. In
order (0 understand the mechanisms controlling a fIre, laboratory-scale laminar and turbulent gas-jet diffusion flames
have been extensively studied, which have provided important information in relation to the physico-chemical
processes occurring in flames. However, turbulent flames are not fully understood and their understanding requires
more fundamental studies of laminar diffusion flames in which the interplay of transpon phenomena and chemical
kinetics is more tractable. But even this basic, relatively simple flame is not completely characterized in relation to
soot formation, radiation. diffusion, and kinetics. Therefore, gaining an understanding of laminar flames is essential
to the understanding of turbulent flames, and panicularly fifes, in which the same basic phenomena occur. Figures I
and 2 show, respectively, the processes occurring in a laminar jet diffusion flame and the three regimes of flames
(i.e., laminar, transitional, and turbulent). In order to improve and verify the theoretical models essential to the
interpretation of data, the complexity and degree of coupling of the controlling mechanisms must be reduced. If
gravity is isolated, the complication of buoyancy-induced convection would be removed from the problem. In
addition, buoyant convection in normal gravity masks the effects of other controlling parameters on the flame.
Therefore, the combination of normal-gravity and microgravity data would provide the information, both theoretical
and experimental. to improve our understanding of diffusion flames in general. and the effects of gravity on the
burning process in particular .

•

Paper presented at the Second International Workshop on Combustion Science in Microgravity, September 15-17,
1992. Cleveland, Orno. This work is supponed by NASA Lewis Research Center under Contracts NAS3-22822 ("Effects
of Buoyancy on Laminar Gas Jet Diffusion FJames," End Date: April 1. 1992) and NAS3-25982 ("Gravitational Effects
on Transitional and Turbulent Gas Jet Diffusion Flames," Start Date: November 11, 1991) with Science Applications
International Corporation.
t Senior Scientist., Author for Correspondence; 21151 Western Avenue, Torrance, CA, 90501 -1724.
t NASA Project Scientist.
tt Research Assistant, Baldwin-Wallace ColJcge. Berea, Ohio .
•• Post-Doctoral Resident Research Associate from University of California, Berkeley.
§ Co-Investigator. formerly of Science Applications International Corporation.

91

Preceding Page Blank

The overall objective of this effort is to gain a better fundamental understanding of the behavior and characteristics of
gas-jet diffusion flames in the absence of buoyancy. Diffusion flames are selected because they are easy to control.
and embody mechanisms important in many combustion processes such as fires and practical combustion systems.
The specific objectives of these microgravity studies are to characterize the transient phenomena of flame

development following ignition. steady-state flame behavior, effects of soot, radiative characteristics, and if any,
extinction phenomena. These objectives are being accomplished through measurements of the microgravity flame
s ize and development. observations on flame color and luminosity, temperature measurements, global and local
flame-radiation measurements, and species measurements. In addition, the tests provide the effects of buoyancy as
well as Reyno lds number, nozzle size. fuel reactiv ity and fuel type, oxygen concentration, pressure, and other global
characteristics of gas-jet diffusion flames over the entire range of laminar, transitional, and turbulent regimes.
Comparisons are also being made with the characteristics of the normal-gravity counterparts of these flames to
detennine the effects of buoyancy on these jet diffusion flames. Analytical and numerical studies are also underway
to provide comparisons between the measured and predicted flame phenomena.
In the following sections, we present the experimental and theoretical efforts conducted to date, in addition to the
important fi nd ings of this program . More information is available from the cited references [1-10]. For a
comprehensive review of the past efforts on laminar diffusion flames, see [IJ.
Ex1)erimental Effort
Tests on laminar diffusion flames of methane and propane were conducted in the 2.2-Second Drop Tower and the
S.18-Second Zero-Gravity Facility of the NASA Lewis Research Center. The oxidizing environment consisted of
15 % to 50% oxygen in nitrogen at pressures of 0.5 to 1.5 atm. In addition, a preliminary series of tests were
conducted in the KC-135 research aircraft. Various nozzle sizes (0.051 to 0.0825 cm in radius) and volume flow
rates ( 1.0 to 5.0 cc/sec for methane and 0.3-1.5 cc/sec for propane) were used. The jet Re ynolds numbers for the
laminar phase of these studies were in the range of 20-200, based on the nozzle radius and fuel properties.
The 2.2-second tests (2,4,61 were conducted to obtain information on the laminar-flame behavior and characteristics,
and to define the matrix for the longer-duration , S.18-second tests. The flames were ignited in microgravity.
Figure 3 shows a schematic of the hardware for the S.18-second tests (3, 7. 91. The experimental chamber had a volume of 0.087 m3 . Two movie cameras recorded the laminar flame development and behavior. A wide-view-angle,
thermopile-detector radiometer was used to measure the global flame radiation over the range of 0.2-9.0 /lIT1. During
the drop, a 3x3 rake of thermocouples measured the temperature both inside and outside the flame at fixed locations.
In the KC-13S lCSts, both attached and free-float configurations of the package were used , and !lame visualization
through photography was conducted.
Tests are currently underway le.g., 101 in the 2.2-Second Drop Tower for studying high-Reynolds-number laminar
flames in addition to transitional and turbulent flames of methane, ethy lene, ethane, propylene, and propane to obtain
the effects of fuel type and Reynolds number, as well as observations of blow-off and other features of these flames .
Nozzle sizes are in the range of 0.025 to 0.050 cm in radius. The flames are studied in air at ambient pressure.
Rame radiation, temperature, and species measurements are planned. in addition to future tests in the S.18-Second
Zero-Gravity Facility and the KC-135 aircrafl
Theoretical Studies
An analytical model was developed for transient, axisymmetric laminar diffusion flames in the absence of buoyancy
(5]. The model incorporated the effects of axial diffusion, and was an extension of the classical model for gas-jet
diffusion flames. In addition, a comprehensive numerical model which incorporated the effects of gravity, diffusion.
inertia, viscosity, combustion. multi-component diffusion, and radiation. was upgraded and utilized for comparisons
with the laminar-flame data. The model is steady-state and two-dimensional (rectangular or cylindrical), with the
partial differential equations for mass. momentum. energy, and species in their boundary-layer form. The governing
equations are solved using an explicit finite-difference scheme. Details of the flow field including velocity,
temperanrre, and species fields. radiative contributions, flame shape and dimensions, and other characteristics of the
flame are predicted and compared with experimental results [e.g., 4).

92

In addition. a numerical model for turbulent flames is currently under development which incorporates the effects of
buoyancy on both mean flow and generation of turbulent kinetic energy (manifested through the correlation of
velocity and temperature fluctuations). Also. analytical models are being developed for the effects of disturbances and
associated vortex interactions with flame front to better characterize the behavior of transitional and turbulent
diffusion flames under microgravity conditions.
In the following sections. some of the important findings of this program on diffusion flames are presented. The
first section presents the observations. experimental data. and predictions for laminar diffusion flames. In the second
section. the results obtained to date on the transitional and turbulent flames are presented. The efforts have shown
unique and unexpected phenomena in microgravity diffusion flames.
Laminar Diffusion-Same Data and Analysis
Laminar diffusion flames of hydrocarbons under microgravity conditions have shown distinct characteristics relative
to normal-gravity flames [IJ. Flames are taller (up to twice). rather globular (up to four times in diameter). and
sootier in microgravity. This is due to the significant reduction in the buoyant force. which makes diffusion the
dominant mechanism of transport. As a result. increased residence time. enhanced soot formation . radiative cooling
due to the larger flame size. and the possible onset of a chemical-kinetics limitation on the heat-release process are
responsible for the very different characteristics of these flames compared to those in normal gravity. Under the
influence of buoyancy. the flame is pencil-like due to the steep gradients of oxygen. which is caused by buoyant
convection and associated entrainment. These flames are generally yellow due to soot emission and burn-off. In
addition. normal-gravity flames burning in quiescent oxidizing environments flicker with a frequency of 10-20 Hz
due to hydrodynamic instability. Under microgravity conditions. flame flicker disappears. the flame becomes larger.
and shows colors ranging from orange to red to entirely blue. depending on the fuel. pressure. and composition of the
oxidizing atmosphere. In addition. absence of buoyancy makes the gradients of oxygen much more shallow
compared to those in normal gravity. The continuous formation and accumulation of the combustion products at the
microgravity flame front which are transported primarily by diffusion with some contribution from the initial (and
rapidly decreasing) jet momentum are responsible for a larger microgravity flame . This process dramatically affects
flame radiation, soot behavior. residence time. flow field characteristics (such as temperature. velocity. and species
distributions). fuel pyrolysis. approach to steady state. and (possibly) even kinetics.
Figure 4 shows laminar methane and propane diffusion flames under both normal-gravity and microgravity
conditions. As mentioned before. microgravity environment has a strong effect on these flames where, for example.
the color. size, and other features of the flame are affected. The yellow. luminous zone indicates the thermal
emission of burning carbon particles. This luminous zone becomes orange. then red. and finally . dark red toward the
boundary of the visible region. as the temperature of the unburned soot decreases. The orange/reddish color of the
flame in microgravity is due to the soot at cooler temperatures that would be expected for typical burn-off conditions.
The normal-gravity flames of methane and propane show similar characteristics such as flame flicker and a luminous
yellow color due to buoyancy. However. the microgravity flames are completely different. The methane flame
shows a closed tip whereas the propane flame has an open tip with quenched soot escaping through the tip. This
underventilated-like behavior is attributed to the effects of pyrolysis. soot formation and quenching. extensive
radiative loss, and possible thermophoretic effects.
Microgravity tests have shown that laminar flames need longer time to reach their near-steady state compared to the
flames in nonnal gravity. In the presence of buoyancy. times of the order of 0.5 second are needed for the flame to
establish and reach steady state following ignition. In microgravity. due to the lack of entrainment caused by
buoyancy. the flame needs longer time (as shown in Figure 5) for approach toward steady state. The accumulation
and slow transport of the combustion products in the absence of buoyancy contributes to this transient flame
development
Pressure and oxygen concentration effects are much more significant in microgravity than in normal gravity.
Laminar flame characteristics. color. luminosity. sooting behavior, and as will be seen later, radiation are strongly
affected by various combinations of pressure and oxygen concentration in the environment of the microgravity flame.
Sooting was eliminated at 18% <h - 0.5 atm. and the flames were weak, entirely blue and soot-free. whereas their
nOnnal-gravity counterparts were yellow, luminous. and very similar to normal-gravity flames under atmospheric. or
even high-pressure/high-oxygen-concentration conditions. This has an impact on fire detection in microgravity
environments. For example, particulate detectors may not respond to blue, non-sooting flames in low gravity.
Figure 6 shows a blue microgravity flame typical of low-pressure/ low-oxygen-concentration flames. Massive

93

sooting has been observed at high oxygen concentrations in microgravity flames. Figure 7 shows a propane flame
with 30% oxygen in the environment. Although the flame is Slronger in luminosity compared to lower-oxygen
microgravity flames, still soot quenching and brealethrough at the tip has been observed, even at 50% oxygen which
showed a column of quenched soot emerging through the tip. Figure 8 shows the effects of oxygen concentration on
methane flame heights in microgravity and nonnal gravity. In general, the lower the oxygen concentration, the tailer
the flame, with a stronger effect in microgravity flames, as predicted.
Figures 9 and 10 show microgravity laminar flame heights of propane burning in air at different pressures and
Reynolds numbers. It appears from this data that the flame height correlates linearly with Reynolds number, but
reaches an apparent minimum between 0.5 alrn and 1.5 alrn. The flame height in all of these tests was based on the
location where red soot changes color into dull red, indicating local flame extinction. Experimental studies [Ill have
shown that soot ceases to burn near 1300 K. The red to dull-red transition seems to roughly correspond to this
temperature. The non-monotonic behavior of flame height with pressure may be attributed to the competitive,
oxygen- and pressure-dependent rates of fuel pyrolysis and particle inception, agglomeration and bum -off. Figure 11
shows the soot quench length (red region at the flame tip) as a function of pressure and Reynolds number.
Tests conducted in the S.18-Second Zero-Gravity Facility have shown that radiative loss from microgravity laminar
fl ames is approximately an order of magnitude larger than the corresponding nonnal gravity flames. This is
primarily due to the accumulation of the combustion products , as well as larger flame size and increased soot.
Figure 12 shows a typical set of data (in m V) for flame radiation in both nonnal-gravity and microgravity environments. Examination of the data also shows that radiation does not reach steady state (unlike the nonnal-gravity
flame) in 5 seconds of microgravity . This is due to the accumulation and slow transport of combustion products
(particularly water vapor and carbon dioxide) in the vicinity of the flame. Visualization of these flames (through
pholOgraphy) has shown that the flame does not appear 10 significantly increase in size with time near the end of the
drop test However, the diffusion of non-luminous hot gases in the surrounding causes the volume of the gas to
increase, which is reflected through the continuous increase in radiation . This has a direct impact on the approach
toward quasi-steady-state in microgravity flames . Figure 13 shows the effects of fuel volume-flow rate (i.e.,
Reynolds number for fixed nozzle diameter) on flame radiation. The figure also shows that because in nonnal
gravity, a large fraction of heat release is removed via the convection of hot products of combustion, the contribution
of energy loss due to radiation from the flame is reduced. In microgravity, practically all of the released heat is
accumulated around the flame through the combustion products, causing radiative losses of up to an order of
magnitude higher compared to nonnal-gravity condition.
Pressure and oxygen concentration also show a significant effect on radiative loss in microgravity. Figure 14 shows
radiation from methane flames under different conditions of pressure and oxygen level. The nonnal-gravity data show
little sensitivity to the environmental condition, whereas radiation levels from microgravity flames are slrongly
affected by pressure and oxygen concenlration. The results have also shown that low-pressure/low-oxygenconcentration flames in microgravity (which are entirely blue, unlike those in nonnal gravity) approach near-steadystate levels of radiation by the end of the available 5 seconds of microgravity. However, high-pressure! high-Qxygenconcentration flames show a continuous increase in radiative loss throughout the drop period, and do not reach steady
state in the available time. Also, blue microgravity flames, which are apparently soot-free, have shown appreciable
amounts of radiation, indicating that conlributions from the water vapor and carbon dioxide bands are quite
significant These experiments represent the first time flame radiation was measured in microgravity environments.
Figure 15 shows the results of temperature measurements for a typical flame in both normal-gravity and
microgravily environments. The position of the thennocouple ralee with respect to the flame is also shown. The
microgravity flame shape in this figure corresponds 10 the condition prior to the deceleration of the package. The
initial overshoot in the data is due to the presence of excess fuel at ignition. The nonnal-gravity data show that the
temperature drops quickly to the ambient value immediately outside the flame front between radial locations of 0.75
and 2.75 cm. This is due to entrainment In addition, the strong buoyancy-driven portion of the flame causes the
three thennocouples near the centerline 10 show roughly equal temperatures, which essentially reach steady state
approximately 3 seconds after the start of the experiment. However, the microgravity data show that far above and
away from the flame, the gas is still experiencing a temperature rise. This figure also shows that the gas
temperature does not reach a steady value anywhere in the field during the 5 seconds of microgravity, again due 10 the
continuous dilution and heating of the environment caused by the combustion products. In addition, large
temperature gradients are observed in the axial direction for the microgravity flame, and the variation of temperature
in the radial direction is significant all the way 10 the far field. The data suggest that although the flame appeared 10
have reached steady state (verified through visualization), 5 seconds of microgravity is not sufficient to obtain
infonnation on the flame structure, since the field is approaching steady state but is still changing in the available
time of 5 seconds.

94

The modeling effort has been an ongoing development process aided by these experiments, and has proven to be a
critically important element contributing to the interpretation of experimental results. Figure 16 shows a
comparison between the measured and predicted microgravity flame heights for a series of fuels. Figure 17 shows
the centerline velocity as a function of axial distance for different gravity levels, using the numerical model discussed
previously. As seen in this figure, under microgravity condition, the gas velocity is highest at the nozzle exit and
drops immediately upon expansion of the jet in the absence of buoyancy. The normal-gravity flame shows a
significant increase in the centerline velocity due to the influence of buoyancy and the behavior of the streamlines.
The intermediate gravitational levels show that the effects of buoyancy become negligible at 10. 4 g. Figure 18
shows the predicted flame heighlS as a function of gravity level and their comparison with the available normalgravity and microgravity flame height measurements. The results are in excellent agreement, and again, it is shown
that effects of buoyancy are not important for jet diffusion flames for gravity levels less than 10. 4 g. Figure 19
shows the predicted shapes of these flames. Figure 20 shows the predicted radial distribution of the axial velocity at
two heights (near the middle and the tip of the flame) as a function of gravitational level. The significant effect of
buoyancy appears in this figure, in addition to the observation that the tip of the microgravity flame is almost at
stagnation. The comparisons of predictions with data are quite encouraging. As data becomes available on other
parameters, comparisons of theory with these data will further substantiate the accuracy of the theoretical model
being developed.
TransitionaVfurbulent Diffusion-Flame Data and Analysis
The investigation of microgravity laminar jet diffusion flames is currently being extended to transitional and
turbulent regimes. Several important and unexpected results have already been obtained on this new effort.
The behavior of gas-jet diffusion flames in normal gravity as a function of the fuel Reynolds number was shown in
Figure 2. In the laminar regime, the variation of flame height is linear with Reynolds number (or fuel volume flow
rate) for a fixed tube diameter. As the Reynolds number increases, the laminar flame undergoes a transitional
behavior, in which, instabilities start to develop at the tip of the flame with a brush-type characteristic, and the flame
height starts to decrease due to enhanced mixing (see Figure 2). As the Reynolds number is further increased, the
boundary of the brush-type region moves upstream, and results in further reduction of flame height A Reynolds
number is finally reached at which the entire flame is fully turbulent and the height no longer changes with increase
in jet momentum (see Figure 2). Further increase in Reynolds number will ultimately lead to blow-off. This
overall behavior is shifted to larger flame heights with increasing tube diameter. and the blow-off limit also moves
to higher Reynolds numbers.
In order to study the effeclS of microgravity on the different regimes of jet diffusion flames . teslS were conducted in
the 2.2-Second Drop Tower with propane and propylene flames; tests for other fuels such as methane, ethane and
ethylene are underway.
Figure 21 shows the variation of flame height with (cold jet) Reynolds number for propane/air diffusion flames. The
normal-gravity flames of the laminar regime show a linear variation of height with Reynolds number, as is expected
from the classical behavior. These flames flicker due to hydrodynamic instability, as discussed before, and the flicker
range increases with increasing jet momentum. The laminar flames are generally yellow with a small blue base. As
the jet momentum increases, the (average) flame height undergoes a transitional regime with a dip which is not a
characteristic of typical transitional flames [12]. However, other studies [e.g., 13] have shown that relatively lowmomentum flames exhibit this type of behavior and, indeed, the flame height in the turbulent regime can be larger
than that in the transitional regime. As the normal-gravity laminar flame goes through transition, lift-off beings,
and a large blue base is formed followed by a yellow brush-type flame which both flickers and wavers from side to
side. This behavior persists throughout the turbulent regime. Blow-off occurs somewhere near Re 6,000.

=

The microgravity flames, on the other hand, show significantly different behavior compared to those in normal
gravity. In the laminar regime, the flame is flicker-free, and as discussed before, is much wider than the normalgravity flame, has an open tip with flame colors changing from blue at the base to yellow, then orange, then red and
finally dark red toward the flame tip. The flame color and shape indicate soot quenching and its subsequent escape
through the tip, which resembles an underventilated-type behavior. However, as the jet momentum increases toward
the transitional regime, the width of the flame tip decreases. In addition, the gap between the microgravity and
(average) normal-gravity flame heights increases with increasing Reynolds number. The microgravity flames of
Figure 21 show a monotonic flame height variation, indicating that transition from the laminar to turbulent regime
may occur quite smoothly, unlike the classical normal-gravity behavior. However, somewhere in the transition

95

regime, the flame tip closes, and large-scale, slow-moving structures develop which do not look like a brush-type
behavior, as in the normal-gravity flames, but rather a wrinkled structure. The flame lifts off the nozzle tip,
although the stand-off distance is almost half of that for the nonnal-gravity flame. Tip flicker was not observed for
any of the microgravity flames . The flame slowly increases in height up to a Reynolds number of 4400, and then
increases further in height, where the tip of the flame unfortunately falls out of the camera field of view. It is
anticipated (as discussed later) that the height will increase in this region with increasing Reynolds number. The
microgravity flame height in this regime is almost twice that of the corresponding nonnal-gravity flame.
Figure 22 shows the behavior of propylene flames under both normal-gravity and microgravity conditions. The
(average) nonnal-gravity height shows the typical classical behavior, similar to Figure 2l. The microgravity flame
did not drop in height in the transition regime, and again, beyond a Reynolds number of approximately 4400, the
flame tip fell outside the camera field of view.
Figure 23 shows the shapes of microgravity and nonnal-gravity propylene flames in both low- and high-Reynoldsnumber laminar regimes. In addition, it shows the shapes of transitional and fully developed turbulent flames of
normal gravity, and their corresponding microgravity flames. Careful examination of these flames has revealed
fundamental differences between the flames of microgravity and those in nonnal gravity. Under normal gravity, as
discussed before, transition is initiated at the tip of the flame and, with increase in Reynolds number, the instability
moves downward closer to the flame base. However, in microgravity , transition initiates with the appearance of
disturbances that form at the base of the flame and are convected downstream. These disturbances are intermiuent in
nature. that is, during the 2.2-second available time and at a critical transition Reynolds number, only one
disturbance is observed which is convected along the flame boundary and moves toward the flame tip. At a slightly
higher Reynolds number, two or three of these disturbances appear during the 2.2-second time, and in between
successive disturbances, the flame is completely laminar in nature (i.e., undisturbed). As the jet Reynolds number
increases, the frequency of occurrence of the disturbances also increases, until a train of disturbances (with a measured
frequency of occurrence of approximately 15 Hz) is formed in the region which corresponds to the normal-gravity
turbulent regime.
The differences between normal-gravity and redUCed-gravity transition of diffusion flames arise due to the strong
influence of buoyancy on the flow field under nonnal-gravity conditions. With gravity, the flow exiting the nozzle
is accelerated. whereas without gravity, the velocity drops with downstream. The numerical model described
previously shows that this behavior is indeed related to the velocity field. The predicted centerline velocities for
typical normal-gravity and microgravity flames were shown in Figure 17. The velocity in the normal-gravity flame
attains its maximum value at the tip of the flame due to the influence of buoyancy, resulting in convergence of
streamlines. In microgravity, the maximum velocity is the jet exit velocity, which then drops sharply due to the
expansion of the gas caused by the absence of buoyancy. Therefore, instability initiates at the tip of the normalgravity flame and at the base of the microgravity flame due to this behavior in the velocity field .
The results shown in Figures 21 and 22 also indicate that the transitional behavior of the microgravity flames may
be extended well beyond the critical range of Reynolds numbers associated with the normal-gravity flames. In
nonnal gravity, the transition to fully developed turbulent regime is accelerated due to the presence of buoyancy
generated turbulence. However, in microgravity, the flame does not have any kinetic energy source associated with
buoyancy. As a result, tranSition to turbulence may occur over a substantially longer range of Reynolds number. It
is quite possible that at sufficiently high jet Reynolds numbers, the microgravity flame will ultimately have
characteristics identical to a fully developed turbulent flame in nonnal gravity. In addition, due to the reduction in
flame stand-off distance in microgravity, it is possible that the flame may show a higher blow-off Reynolds number
compared to that in normal gravity. Quantifying these phenomena in addition to the other characteristics of
transitional and turbulent jet diffusion flames in microgravity represents the focus of this research.
Conclusions and Future Plans
The studies conducted to date in this program have provided unique and new infonnation on the behavior and
characteristics of gas jet diffusion flames in microgravity environments. Significant differences have been observed
between the normal-gravity flames and those under reduced-gravity conditions. The goal of this research is to extend
these observations in order to fully characterize the influences of buoyancy on the structure of, and physico-chemical
processes occurring in, microgravity gas jet diffusion flames over the entire range of laminar, transitional, and
turbulent regimes.

96

References

~

1.

Edelman, R. B. and Bahadori, M. Y., "Effects of Buoyancy on Gas-Jet Diffusion Hames,"
Astronautica, Vol. 13, No. 11/12, pp. 681-688,1 986.

2.

Bahadori, M. Y. and Stocker, D. P., "Oxygen-Concentration Effects on Microgravity Laminar
Methane and Propane Diffusion Hames," Paper presented at the Eastern States Meeting of The
Combustion Institute, Albany, New York, OctoberfNovember 1989.

3.

Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Sotos, R. G., and Stocker, D. P., "Measurement of Temperature in
Microgravity Laminar Diffusion Hames," Paper presented at the Eastern States Meeting of the
Combustion Institute, Orlando, Florida, December 1990.

4.

Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Stocker, D. P., and Olson, SL., "Ignition and Behavior of Laminar
Gas-Jet Diffusion Hames in Microgravity," AIAA Journal, Vol. 28, No.2, pp. 236-244, 1990.

S.

Bahadori, M. Y., "An Analytical Solution for Transient, Cylindrically Symmetric Laminar Diffusion
Rames in the Absence of Buoyancy," Paper presented at the Central States Meeting of The
Combustion Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio. May 1990.

6.

Bahadori, M. Y., Stocker. D. P .. and Edelman. R. B., "Effects of Pressure on Microgravity
Hydrocarbon Diffusion Hames," Paper AIAA-90-0651 , AIAA 28th Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Reno, Nevada, January 1990.

7.

Bahadori. M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Sotos, R. G., and Stocker. D. P .• "Radiation from Gas-Jet
Diffusion Flames in Microgravity Environments." Paper AIAA-91-0719. AIAA 29th Aerospace
Sciences Meeting, Reno, Nevada, January 1991.

8.

Bahadori, M. Y. and Edelman, R. B., "Combustion of Gaseous Fuels Under Reduced-Gravity
Conditions." Paper LB-038, in press in Proceedings of The Second Symposium on Lunar Bases,
Lunar and Planetary Institute. Houston. Texas, 1992.

9.

Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B. , Stocker, D. P., Sotos, R. G .• and Vaughan, D. F., "Effects of
Oxygen Concentration on Radiative Loss from Normal-Gravity and Microgravity Methane Diffusion
Rames, " Paper AIAA-92-0243, AlAA 30th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, Nevada, January
1992.

10.

Bahadori, M. Y., Vaughan, D. F., Stocker, D. P., Weiland, K. J., and Edelman, R. B., "Preliminary
Observations on the Effects of Buoyancy on Transitional and Turbulent Diffusion Hames, " Paper
presented at the Central States Meeting of The Combustion Institute, Columbus, Ohio, April 1992.

11.

Kent, 1. H. and Wagner, R. Gg., Combustion Science and Technolon, Vol. 41, pp. 245-269.1984.

12.

Hottel, H. C. and Hawthorne, W. R., Third SymDQsium on Combustion, pp. 254-266, Williams and
Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1949.

13.

Wohl, K., Gazley, C., and Kapp, N., Third SymDQsium on Combustion, pp. 288-300, Williams and
Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1949.

97

.....,;...._ _ fully dlYlloped
;

•

lUIbulltll llam ••

,
I

\

\

\

,

\

\
\

,j\

/\,

"
i l'~~
/t\ , ' ,

lHT--..r

/''Ti--:-~'~
'

Volume flow rate (or Reynolds number)

u,
Figure 2.- Change in flame height and behavior
with increase in volume flow rate for a gas jet
diffusion flame in normal gravity; x indicates
blow-off.

Figure 1.- Sc hematics of a laminar gas jet diffusion
flame in normal gravity.

1-9

0-9

scal. :

~

• 1 ca

OR---c::.=~
R---t7--~

If

O---rr
f Ull IIIl ZlI. E

SPAAJ( ElE CTROO(

Y~

Y/ W---+B/ P _ _.....

SI P

08/ P- - - - . ; ;

08/P

propane
IWli 0000 TER

1- 9

Seal&: _

• I em

methane

T{W

GAS SNt'L11OG 'ROBES
AIID

llIE~lES

RAOIOt£TER

Figure 4.- Typical normal-gravity and microgravity
flames of methane and propane in the laminar
regime; nozzle radius = 0.048 cm for methane and
0.0825 cm for propane; volume flow rate = 5.25
cc/sec for methane and 1.0 cc/sec for propane; air
at 1 atm is the oxidizer. The bars show the range
of normal-gravity flame flicker (t) . The various
colors indicated in the diagram are as follows: B
(blue), D (dark), DB (dark blue), DP (dark pink), 0
(orange), P (Pink), R (red), W (white), and Y
(yellow); reproduced from [2] and [7].

Figure 3.- Schematics of the experiment package
for the Sol8-second teSts.

98

10

:1

3

;j

E

I

fI~

5

~
~

/

--Icm

1>

5

wlpj-

1/

t.J

W/Y

wI,/-

W
I

4

3

..!.:1.
F~O PANE,

0-9

217. OXYGEN, 1 ArM

2
0
OJ
Q

Q= 1 5
0= 1.0
0= 0 .5

Figure 7.- Effects of high oxygen concentration on a
laminar propane diffusion flame; 30% oxygen, 1
atm, volume flow rate = I cc/sec, and nozzle radius
= 0.048; see Fig. 4 for the deftnition of colors; f
is the flicker range; reproduced from [21.

ee l s
eel s
eel s

0
0

2

-1 ~E

3

4

(se conos )

5

5

Figure 5.- Ignition and development of a series of
microgravity propane diffusion flames.

12

~

0

u

•

rio
!•

s. zs

•

a

0&/.

1." 0&/.

~

:Ii •

~:-.Icm

~

4

16

II

20

12

24

26

21

lO

12

l~_

Figure 8.- Effects of oxygen concentration on
methane diffusion flames at 1 atrn; nozzle inner
radius = 0.048 cm and P = 1 atm; reproduced from
[2].

o

12

r-------------------------------~
'·l.llao

10

0. 1

Itil

1.0 Ita

i-

Figure 6.- Effects of low oxygen concentration on a
laminar propane diffusion flame; 18% oxygen, 1.0
atm, volume flow rate = 1 cc/sec, and nozzle radius
=0.074 cm; for the deftnition of colors, see Fig. 4;
f is the normal-gravity flicker range; reproduced
from [2].

t '
I

.,

U7

Figure 9.- Microgravity propane-air flame heights
vs. Reynolds number for different pressures;
reproduced from [6].

99

12 ~------------------------------I

6.0

10

5.0

I

::

"

.

.,

19

-:-

4.0

'"e
.....

~
0.1

.

1. 1

3. 0

~

•
..,
•

-

Figure 10.- Microgravity propane-air flame heights
vs. pressure for different Reynolds numbers;
reproduced from (6) .

1.0

1. 1 . . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,

-

0. 0

1.1

0. 5

1.0

1.5

1.0

~

2. 0

~

!

Figure 13.- Effects of fuel flow rate on radiation
from laminar propane-air diffusion flames at I atm.
The radiation data for microgravity flames are !.he
average values between 4 .0 and 5.0 seconds after
ignition; reproduced from [7].

il.l

~

1

0.1

o.•
0.0

L..-._..... :::____

J..._ _ _ _-'-_ _---I

49

141

5.0

Figure 11 .- Soot quench length vs . jet Reynol.ds
number as a function of pressure for mlcrogravlty
propane air flames; reproduced from (6) .

4.0

30%-0

2

•

O-g

3.0

'"
~

Thermal

8

~d1.~ion

(1IlV)

/I.

o

18%-oZ

'"II

12

/\ /
II'
o

/

\

~
O~G

7:

:i
<II

~

\

i

\
\.

I-G

z.o

1.0

1

I-g
4

2

• \

5

Drop
S~arts

Tillie

(sec)

0.0

Figure 12.- Radiometer response from a propane
flame burn ing in quiescent air at 1 atm; flow rate =
1.5 cc/sec and nozzle radius = 0.0825 cm;
reproduced from (7] .

0. 5

3O%-<lz ; 18%-oZ

I

•

1.0

1.5

Prusure ( atlll )

Figure 14.- Effects of oxygen concentration and
pressure on radiative loss from methane flames at a
fixed mass flow rate (corresponding to 3 cc/sec at 1
atm); nozzle radius =0.0825 em.

100

i

Nonna l Grav i ty

Microgravity

1200

-

I

H

....

"-

-"""

~

200

200

t ( sec )

o

a
\

.\

b
-"--

.~

t (ue)

1200

1
If ·

L

---

I

e,f

--

....

I

~

.

ct

.:--..

I

I

200

t (sec)

t ( sec )

1200

1200

q

!1.

..-1-

.......

Jl.
~

h 1
1

200

200

t

t (sec)

( sec)

l

..
lL- 9 __ ..... i
"

f•

I

I

I
I

I~

I

. ....... e -_ .• f

d

I
I~

I

I

I a....... It. .J~

i

IL

~= ~:/I'r ~ . _........
I

,

_.
..J

~

I
I

I

"

' / r/lI

."

~
P.,atm

-

'f'IJ

Figure 15.- Temperature data for normal-gravity
and microgravity laminar propane diffusion flames
at 19% oxygen and 1 aun; volume flow rate = 1.5
cc/sec and nozzle radius = 0.0825 cm; for the
definition of colors see Fig. 4; f is the flicker range
for the normal-gravity flame; L is the distance
between the nozzle tip and the lowest row of
thermocouples. The columns of thermocouples
are, respectively, 0.75 cm away from the centerline
and 2 cm apart; the rows of thermocouples are 3
cm apart. The diagram is to-scale; reproduced
from [3].

'.....0,

L.1 0 em

101

200

:;;
..,
L.

0

..., ......
,...
Qu.. ;

-,-

0

A

-

-

...

0

(tJtrl ...

c

o.u ;

.....,

""'eoIt

a

•

' .. .. l ett ... ' ( I.,

II I

~_-- - } "" 1(\ ,_, (, ~" ... t

tt .... "

o
100

ZOO

300

R olds number
eyn

III

-5

IU

-4

10

-J

III

-2

10

-L

10

0

10

12

l'

2Q

24

18

Figure 17.- Predicted non-dimensional cen terline
velocity (wi th respect to jet exi t velocity) vs. axial
distance along the jet; methane/air flames; nozzle
radius = 0.0825 cm, fuel flow rate = I cc/sec,
pressure = I aun; reproduced, with modifications,
fro m [1).

Figure 16.- Measured and predicted microgravi ty
flame heights for different fuels; for the references
cited in this figure, see [4].

o

8

1(,.)-

4<;0

·1

4

E
u

...

.c

•

CH 4/ air flames

'"

'"
50
'"

o:

~

2

P : 1 atm

:t:

r0

'"

2 cc/s ec
:

•

I-g

0.082 5 cm

:-\ethane-Air flames

o • 2 cc/ sec

!lata

ro : 0.0825 an

Pr edict i on

P • 1

atm

0
- 00

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

a

+1

00

4
r

Figure 19.- Predicted flame shapes as a function of
gravity level; methane-air flames, volume flow
rate = 2 ec/sec, nozzle radius = 0.0825 cm, P = 1
aun.

Figure 18.- Predicted flame height as a function of
gravity level and comparisons with experimental
data; methane-air flames, volume flow rate = 2
eels&', nozzle radius 0.0825 em, P 1 aUTI.

=

( em)

=

102

I
I

10- 2 g

-.!.:.!L

10- 1 B

2.0

2.0

-

x

=

1 .2.

1. 85 an

- x = 1.94
- - x = 3.54

-x

=

1. 5

1.5
f

=

2.6

2.0

- - x = 3. 02 an

em

--- x = 2. 4 em

h

...2::I:....

2. .0

h

\. 0

-2

"
"

......

f

=

3.5

h

-2

"

O. ')

0

f

=

3.8 an

>-

1. 0

-2

"

c

1.0

"

O. ')

0 .5

em

=

4.0

=

4.4 on

em

1.5 t-

em

c 1. 0

x = 2.2 1

-

___ x

1. 5

em

0

~

e

h

f

~

~

O. ')

~

-

::::::-....
o

o
r

(em)

r

o

3

2
(em)

2

0

r (em)

2
r (em)

Figure 20.- Predicted axial velocity distributions at different axial locations for flames under different
gravitational levels; methane-air flames; p == I atm, flow rate =2 cc/sec, nozzle radius =0.0825 cm, and
jet exit velocity =93.5 cm/s.

56

OlWft - It p

Clos~d-tlp

.tcrogr.v1 ty

48

.'cr09r,. t ty

n •••

n •••

'HCAOGRAVlTY
FlAAE HE! GIlT

40

OIIt of tM C• • r.
Ft~ld

of YI",

32
R

24

()

16

8

o

l200

2400

3600

4800

6000

7200

Jet Reynolds Number

Figure 21.- Normal-gravity and microgravity heights of propane flames burning in quiescent air at 1 attn,
as a function of the jet Reynolds number (based on the fuel properties and nozzle diameter); for the color
symbols, see Fig. 4. The dotted line in the normal-gravity plots indicates uncertainty in the trend which
is currently under investigation. The circles show the particular flames studied in this work; f is the
flicker envelope for the nonnal-gravity flames; reproduced from (10).

103

50 . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -,

Flame t lp alit o f the
camera fielrl of vipw

411

----- - -_\._ --- -

..

Blow-off of the
30

0

.c

CD
~

normal-g flame

a
•

20

0

o

a

o

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

:J

a

~I

a

o

a

OJ
:I:

I

"I

a

~
u..

a
0

to

I

~
J

"

O-G FlAME

a I.GFlAME

0

2COO

tCOO

4000

3000

6000

7000

Je t Reynolds Number

Figure 22.- Micrograviry and (average) normal-gravity heights of propylene fl~es burning in .quiescent
air at 1 atm. as a function of the jet Reynolds number (based on the fuel propertIes and nozzle diameter).

R

0

R

R

0

Y/O

0

Y
Y
Y
R
0

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

B
IT

O- g
( a)

n

B

l-g

Re = 845

B

n

n

O
-g

B

B

l-g

( b)

n
O
-g

Re = 1970

B

n
l-g

(d Re = 2810

B

B

n

n

O-g

l-g

( d)

Re = 3940

Figure 23.- NOrmal-gravity and microgravity flames of propylene; (a) low-Reynolds-number laminar
flame, (b) high-Reynolds-number laminar flame, (c) beginning of transitional behavior with a single
disturbance in microgravity, and (d) fully transitional flame with a train of disturbances in microgravity.
The colors are as follows: B (blue), 0 (orange), R (red), Y (yellow); f is the flicker range for the normalgravity flame; scale:
I
I
=10 cm.

104

COMMENTS
Question - (Jerry Ku, Wayne State University): For low fl ow rates (e.g. 1.5 cc/sec), zcro-g flamc~ are much
taller, wider, and open-tipped. At higher flow rates (e.g. 350 cc/sec), zero-g flames arc not much wider and
close-tipped. Is there a good exp lanation for this observation?
Answer: In genera l, the microgravity laminar flames (including th e 350 eel sec) are taller and \',;itkr than their
normal-gravity counterparts, and have open tips. At higher R eynolds numbers (i.e., in the transit ional and
turbulent regimes) the flames are still taller and wider than th ose in normal gravity, but show a dosed tip.
The flame-tip closing may be attributed to enhanced transport.
Question (G. Faeth, University of Michigan: It requires some distance to develop the flow in t uhcs. What
was the burner passage length-to-diameter ratio of your experimcnts?
Answer: The ratio of length to diameter is larger th an 100.
Question (S. Raghu, State University of New York at Stony Brook): The Reynolds numbers or tht: flames
you mentioned in your talk is based on the "cold fl ow" condi tions. One has to be cautious in intnpreting the
fluid dynamic phenomena of stabi lity. transition and turbul e nce of the flames based on thi s fictitillus cold
110w Reynolds number. Are there any details about the exit mean velocity profiles (parabolic ()I lop-hat),
a nd the nozzle shape (contraction ratio, nozzle tip thickness) measured for your setup?
Answer: The cold-fuel Reynolds number was selected to compare the flame behavior with tht: cl<lssical works
on this subject. We do realize that the Reynolds number based on local now properties may significant ly
deviate from the jet exit Reynolds number. In ou r opi nion, however the latter remains a useful parameter in
describing the observed flow phenomena as has bee n done in the past. As such, we fail to understand what
is meant by a "fictitious" Reynolds number. We used circular nozzles in the range 0.5-1.0 mm inner
diameter. Although no velocity measurements were conducted, th e large length-to-diameter rati() (larger than
100) indicates that the flow is fully developed at the nozzle exit. The nozzle tip was tapered. and the inside
had no co ntraction.

105

STRUCTURE AND SOOT PROPERTIES OF NON-BUOYANT LAMINAR
ROUND-JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
Saeed Mortazavi, Peter B. Sunderland, Jongsoo Jurng, and Gerard M. Faeth
Department of Aerospace Engineering
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2140

Introduction
The structure and soot properties of non buoyant laminar diffusion flames are being studied
experimentally and theoretically in order to better understand the soot and thermal radiation
emissions from luminous flames. The measurements involve weakly-buoyant flames at low
pressures in normal gravity (ng) and non buoyant flames at normal pressures in microgravity (J.l.g).
Earlier measurements of the structure of non buoyant laminar diffusion flames have used drop
towers [1-7J. Measurements have been limited to flame lengths, fmding good agreement between
predictions based on the conserved-scalar formalism and measurements, although flame length is
not a very sensitive indicator of model perforrnance_ Additionally, limited instrumentation and test
time capabilities of drop towers have inhibited detailed studies of soot processes.
Buoyant laminar diffusion flames have received significant attention [8-20]. However, buoyancy
causes soot to be confmed to a narrow soot layer that is difficult to resolve experimentally, while
the path that soot follows as it grows and oxidizes is completely different in buoyant and
non buoyant flames [18]. This limits the value of findings from buoyant diffusion flames because
non buoyant flames are of greatest practical interest. Additionally, Glassman [17] questions the
existence of a global property like laminar smoke point flame lengths for non buoyant diffusion
flames, analogous to buoyant flames, because they have residence times independent of flame
length under the boundary layer approximation. Clearly, the mechanism causing practical
non buoyant flames to emit soot is not understood.
Finally, detailed simulations of chemical kinetics have been successful for methane/air flames
where soot concentrations are low [19,20] but analogous methods for soot-containing flames will
require substantial advances in the understanding of fuel decomposition and soot chemistry. An
alternative approach is possible, however, because gas species concentrations in soot-containing
flames are largely functions of the mixture fraction, yielding state relationships that could be used
with the conserved-scalar formalism (the laminar flamelet approach). However, this approach has
not been tested.
Thus, the objectives of the present investigation are to study the differences of soot properties
between nonbuoyant and buoyant diffusion flames, and to evaluate predictions based on the
laminar flamelet approach.
Experimental Methods
Normal-Gravity Tests. Detailed measurements of flame properties are being undertaken at ng,
exploiting the fact that buoyancy scales like p2g in laminar flames, where p =pressure (atm.) and g

PreCeding Page Blank
107
- -.- -

= normal gravitational acceleration [18]. Thus, flames at pressures of 0(0.1 atm.) have effective
gravitational levels of 0(0.01 g) and are weakly-buoyant if they are not too large. Present
measurements were carried out in a windowed chamber using burners having diameters of 3-10
mm with nearly fully-developed laminar pipe flow at the exit. A continuous inflow of fuel and
oxidant, and outflow of combustion products, allows unlimited test times. Thus far,
measurements include dark-field photography for flame shapes, fine-wire thermocouples for
temperature distributions, laser extinction for soot volume fractions, thennophoretic sampling for
soot structure, and wide-band radiometry for radiative heat loss fractions, see (8-15] for
descriptions of these methods.
Low-Gravity Tests. Tests at Ilg were carried out to measure the laminar smoke point flame lengths
of nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames at pressures of 0.5-2.0 atm. This involved the NASA
KC-135 aircraft facility using a test chamber that was designed at NASA-Lewis with burner
diameters of 1.6, 2.7 and 5.9 mm, and fully-developed laminar pipe flow at the exit.
Measurements were limited to video and film motion pictures of the flames to find laminar smoke
point flame lengths.
Theoretical Methods
The following approximations were used to analyze flame structure: steady, laminar, axisymmetric
flow; laminar flamelet approximation, which implies equal binary diffusivities of all species,
negligible thermal diffusion, unity Lewis number and attached flames ; uniform am bient
environment; ideal gas mixture with a constant PrandtVSchmidt number; and constant radiative heat
loss fraction of the available chemical energy release. This yields the following governing
equations:
(1)
V · (p u) = 0
V · (p u u)

=

pg - Vp + V · (Il (Vu + V u T))

V . (p u f) == V · (Il V f)la

(2)
(3)

where p = density, U = velocity vector, Il = viscosity, f = mixture fraction, a = Prandtl/Schmidt
number and superscript T denotes the transpose of a tensor. State relationships giving the
composition, temperature, density and viscosity as a function of mixture fraction were found from
correlations of measurements in laminar flames for combustion in air [12-14].
Results and Discussion
Flame Structure. Figure 1 is an illustration of predicted and measured flame lengths, L,
normalized by the burner diameter, d, as a function of burner exit Reynolds number, Re. These
results involve ethylene/air flames at atmospheric pressure, with measurements from Haggard and
Cochran [2]. Similar to other evaluations of flame lengths for moderately sooting fuels, the
comparison between predictions and measurements is excellent. Flame shapes and temperature
distributions provide a more sensitive evaluation of predictions and have been studied using lowpressure flames. Predicted and measured flame shapes for ethylene/air flames at 0.125 and 0.250
atm. are illustrated in Fig. 2 for d = 3 IllIl1, with z and r denoting streamwise and radial directions.
The measurements denote the boundary of the blue portion of the flame, and are terminated where
yellow soot luminosity prevents observation of the blue boundary. The small change of flame
shape as the pressure varies shows that effects of buoyancy are small. The comparison between
predictions and measurements is reasonably good, including lengths, widths and the tendency of
the flames to attach below the burner exit, for a range of burner exit Reynolds numbers. Predicted

108

L

and measured temperature distributions of ethylene/air flames at 0.25 atm. and z/d = 39.2 are
illustrated in Fig. 3. Temperatures were measured with thermocouples corrected for radiation
errors. The comparison between predictions and measurements is good except for a slight
overestimation of peak temperatures and underestimation of flow widths.
It is useful to consider flame residence times, tr, defined as the time for a fluid parcel to convect
along the axis from the burner exit to the flame sheet, in order to interpret smoke point flame
lengths. Predictions of tr for non buoyant flames as flame lengths are varied for a particular burner
diameter are illustrated in Fig. 4. They show that tr is proportional to L, which differs from
behavior when the boundary layer approximations apply, considered by Glassman [17], due to
effects of streamwise diffusion. Similar predictions when the burner diameter is varied for a
particular flame length appear in Fig. 5. They show a progressive increase of tr with burner
diameter, which differs from ng conditions where tr is relatively independent of burner diameter
[14]. Another feature of these results is the large residence times of non buoyant flames in
comparison to buoyant flames of comparable size (an order of magnitude larger) which implies
rather different soot reaction conditions.
Soot Properties. A typical example of soot volume fraction distributions in nonbuoyant jet
diffusion flames is illustrated in Fig. 6. These results are for an acetylene flame with an ambient
oxygen mass fraction of 0.75, d = 3 mm, Re = 250 and p = 0.25 atm. An annular soot layer is
evident near the burner exit with soot building up near the axis as the flame tip (ca. z/d = 9.35) is
approached. Soot oxidation extends to the axis beyond the flame tip with soot concentrations
becoming small far from the burner exit for this nonsooting flame. The breadth of the sootcontaining region provides unprecedented spatial resolution in comparison to buoyant flames.
Laminar Smoke Points. Laminar smoke point flame lengths, L s, were measured for ethylene/air
and propane/air flames at pressures of 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 atm. Some typical results for propane/air
flames at atmospheric pressure at Ilg, and at ng from [14,16], are as follows :
d(mm)
Ls (mm)

1.6 (Ilg)
42

2.7 (Ilg)

38

5.9 (Ilg)
42

10.0 (ng)
162-169

Findings for ethylene/air flames were similar. There are several interesting features about the
comparison between observations at Ilg and ng. First of all, the nonbuoyant flames exhibit laminar
smoke point flame lengths, in contrast to the conjecture of Glassman [17], because their residence
times vary with flame length as discussed earlier. Secondly, varying d at Ilg has little effect on Ls
even though residence times vary appreciably. Additionally, the Ls are roughly four times shorter
at Ilg than ng. Finally, residence times at the laminar smoke point are appreciably larger at Ilg than
ng, 200-1500 ms in comparison to 40-50 ms. The different soot paths in non buoyant and
buoyant flames, and the extended oxidation region of non buoyant flames, undoubtedly playa role
in this behavior, although the specific mechanisms are unknown. These results clearly highlight
the substantial differences between the global sooting properties of frequently studied buoyant
diffusion flames and the non buoyant diffusion flames of greater practical importance.
Conclusions
Thus far, the major conclusions of the study are as follows: (1) the laminar-flamelet approach
appears to be attractive for predicting the structure of soot-containing laminar diffusion flames; (2)
residence times of non buoyant laminar diffusion flames (L/d < 20-30) increase proportional to
burner diameter and flame length, with the latter behavior being caused by effects of streamwise
diffusion; (3) nonbuoyant diffusion flames exhibit much broader soot-containing regions and

109

larger soot-oxidation regions in comparison to buoyant diffusion flames; and (4) the properties of
laminar smoke point flame lengths and residence times of non buoyant laminar diffusion flames
have little resemblance to those of more widely studied buoyant laminar diffusion flames.
Acknowledg;ements
This research was sponsored by NASA Grant No. NAG3-1245, under the technical management
of D. Urban of the Lewis Research Center.
References.
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
ll.
12.
13.
14.
15 .
16 .
17.
18.
19.
20 .

Cochran, T.R. and Masica, W.J., Thirteenth Symposiwn (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1970, pp. 821-829.
Haggard, J.B. Jr. and Cochran, T.R. , Combust. Flame, Vol. 5, 1972, pp. 291-298.
Edelman, R.B. et al., Fourteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1972, pp. 399-412.
KJajn , M. and Oppenheim, A.K., Nineteenth Symposiwn (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1982, pp. 223-235.
Bahadori, M.Y., Edelman, R.B. , Stocker, D.P. and Olson , S.L., AIAA J., Va!. 28,
1990, pp. 236-242.
Bahadori, M. Y. , Stocker, D. P. and Edelman, R. B., AIAA Paper No. 90-0651 , 1990.
Bahadori, M.Y ., Edelman, R.B., Stocker, D.P., Sotos, R.G . and Vaughan , D.F., AIAA
Paper No. 92-0243, 1992.
Santoro, RJ., Semerjian, H.B. and Dobbins, R.A ., Combust. Flame, Vol. 51, 1983, pp.
203-218.
Santoro, R. J., Yeh , T. T., Horvath, J. J. and Semerjian, H. G ., Combust. Sci. Tech .,
Vol. 53, 1987, pp. 89-115.
Dobbins, R.A . and Megaridis, C.M. , Langmuir, Vol. 3,1987, pp. 254-259.
Megaridis, C.M. and Dobbins, R.A., Combust. Sci. Tech., Vol. 66, 1989, pp. 1-16;
Ibid ., Vol. 77, 1990, pp. 95-109.
Gore, J.P. and Faeth, G.M., Twenty-First Symposium (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1986, pp. 1521-153l.
Gore, J.P. and Faeth, G.M. , J. Heat Trans., Vol. 111,1988, pp. 173-18l.
Sivathanu, Y.R. and Faeth, G.M. , Combust. Flame, Vol. 81, 1990, pp. 133-149.
Sivathanu, Y.R. and Faeth , G.M., Combust. Flame, Vol. 82, 1990, pp. 211 -230.
Schug, K.P., Manheimer-Timnat, Y., Yaccarino, P. and Glassman, 1., Combust. Sci .
Tech ., Vol. 22, 1980, pp. 235-250.
Glassman, 1., Twenty-Second Symposium (International) on Combustion , The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1988, pp. 295-31l.
Faeth, G .M., Proceedings of AIAAIIKI Microgravity Science Symposium , AIAA,
Washington, 1991 , pp. 281-293.
Dixon-Lewis, G. et al. , Twentieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1984, pp. 1893-1903.
Rogg, B ., in Mathematical Modeling in Combustion and Related Topics (C.-M. Brauner
and C. Schmidt-Laine, eds.), Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Amsterdam, 1988, pp. 551 560.

110

20

j

ETHYLENI!/AIA
Ae.UO

60

1e

o

I

01

40

I

12

-:

!:

• ' d

o
/

20

/0

8

1

PREDICTIONS

r

,
:

r
1
r

~

I

~

1

'

100

1 50

200

• ,(')
25

..

e1f

Ae

ETHYLENE. AIR

=

100

fo\
I

= 0 .25 11m

J

0

I

I

I

°1

70 0 ~

\

SO

0

().£),

\

()

()/25 \

.,

0

8~rw~~\
I
e()o

o~.e /

300

$
00

Q

•

p=O. 125 Itm .

d

Fig. 2 Predicted and measured flame shapes
of weakly-buoyant ethylene/air jet diffusion
flames.

,:)

~

.p

250

Fig. 1 Predicted and measured flame lengths
of nonbuoyant ethylene/air jet diffusion
flames. Measurements from Haggard and
Cochran [2].

P

1>

0 \ 0
0.

I)
•'V

~~

"'

'

I

..

~ / ' "--..

R.

11 00

0'1

.

..

p.0. 25 atm.

50

<il

:)

:)

"r.:)" .

I

ETHYLENE/AIR

0 0,

50

~.

00
0

0

•

...J

/0
a

i

j

100

'

0

Lid

(I~
-6,

yl~~
I
... 1

i

l

MEASUREMENTS

/

\~~ ~__

·_~~C)V

o

· 40

40

r(mm)

Fig. 3 Predicted and measured temperature
distributions in weakly-buoyant ethylene/air
diffusion flames.

111

-&.

ETHYL ENE:AIR
d

=

p

=1

10 mm
.tm.

.

Lo = 32.5 mm
tro

13.3~

z/d

~ . .. K

~ b..... ...
..--

= 2.4'

o

' ...... 1.1 .••••• ••

.~

~

.

.~

.::

.. yJd

= 11 ',4

z/d

oL__~~__~~__~~
I

1. .. a . . . .

..

••
,•

.

,

r

a ....

9 .5-

12

L Lo

z/d

Fig. 4 Predicted flame residence times as a
func tion of flame length for non buoyant
ethylene/air diffusion flames.

7 .6 .~

o ~----------~--------~-+~.-~

•

z/d
61

p

n

..,

= ~5
=

"--..
'

ETH YLENE AIR
L

5.8

mm

~.

•

1 atm .

H·

::;
w
U
Z

z/d

w

Q

in
w

3.8

•

2-

CI:

•
O L--~----~I----~--~'----~--~ 2
I
1
o
~
8

0o
~~~----~--------~~-+--2
3
4
r ( mm )
u

BURHER OlAMETER (mm l

Fig. 5 Predicted flame residence times as a
function of burner diameter for nonbuoyant
ethylene/air diffusion flames.

Fig. 6 Measured soot volume fraction
dis tribu tions
for
weakly-buoyan t
acetylene/oxygen/nitrogen diffusion flames: d
= 3 mm, Re = 250, P = 0.25 atm. and
ambient oxygen mass fraction = 0.75.

11 2

COMMENTS
Question: (Osamu Fujita, Hokkaido University): (1) Are there any reasons why you choose ethylene as a
fuel?
2) Are the flames you showed in the presentation steady-state or not? According to our results, width or
diameter of butane flame become larger with increase in microgravi ty time, especially when the gas injected
speed is low.
Answer: Our experiment currently involves ethylene and acetylene flames because they have been studied
extensively in the past - particularly ethylene. Future work will address effects of fuel type over a broader
range.
The low-pressure weakly-buoyant fl a mes we are studying in the laboratory are all steady; we can operate
them indefinitely and accumulate data over periods of hours. The low-gravity tests using the NASA KC-135
facility last 15-20 seconds, which yields stable flame lengths in the absence of disturbances, but are marginal
as steady-state flames due to limited development times and disturbances. This is the best we can do prior
to space-based tests at microgravity, but we don't believe that this compromises the major conclusions about
differences of laminar smoke-poin t properties for nonbuoyant and buoyant flames.
Question (C.T. Avedisian, Cornell University): Can you comment on sensitivity of your predictillns to
uncertainties in physical property values?
Answer: Our predictions are sensitive to estimates of the radiative heat losses from the flames due to the
st rong variation of transport properties with temperature. Thus. we currently arc working on additional
measurements of the distribution of radiative heat losses from the flames to reduce these uncert ;linties.
Computa tions for ad hoc variations of properties have been carried out to a limited t1egrcc, and "uggest that
reduced diffusivities yield proportional increases of flame lengths.

113

__i

-I

AN EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL STUDY OF RADIATIVE
EXTINCTION OF DIFFUSION FLAMES
Arvind Atreya, Indrek Wichman, Mark Guenther,
Anjan Ray, and Sanjay Agrawal
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Michigan State University
East Lansing , Michigan 48824

INTRODUCTION

In a recent paper on "Observations of candle flames under various atmospheres in microgravity"
by Ross et al. (ref. 1) , it was found that for the same atmosphere, the burning rate per unit wick
surface area and the flame temperature were considerably reduced in microgravity as compared
with normal gravity. Also, the flame (spherical in microgravity) was much thicker and further
removed from the wick. It thus appears that the flame becomes "weaker" in microgravity due
to the absence of buoyancy generated flow which serves to transport the oxidizer to the
combustion zone and remove the hot combustion products from it. The buoyant flow, which
may be characterized by the strain rate, assists the diffusion process to execute these essential
functions for the survival of the flame. Thus, the diffusion flame is "weak" at very low strain
rates and as the strain rate increases the flame is initially "strengthened" and eventually it may
be "blown out". The computed flammability boundaries of T'ien (ref. 2) show that such a
reversal in material flammability occurs at strain rates around 5 sec- l .
At very low or zero strain rates, flame radiation is expected to considerably affect this "weak"
diffusion flame because: (i) the concentration of combustion products which participate in gas
radiation is high in the flame zone, and (ii) low strain rates provide sufficient residence time for
substantial amounts of soot to form which is usually responsible for a major portion of the
radiative heat loss. We anticipate that flame radiation will eventually extinguish this flame.
Thus, the objective of this project is to perform an experimental and theoretical investigation of
radiation-induced extinction of diffusion flames under microgravity conditions. This is important
for spacecraft fire safety .
PROJECT DESCRIPTION:

For the experimental and theoretical investigation of radiation-induced extinction two simple
geometries are chosen: [Note: this project started in April 1991]

Preceding Page Blank
11 5

(i)

A spherical dijJusion jlame supponed by a low heal capaciry porous gas burner: This is
considered suitable for the p.g experiments and modeling because all the soot formed is
trapped between the burner and the high temperature reaction zone. Here, flame
radiation will be enhanced by soot oxidation which will occur as soot crosses the high
temperature reaction zone. To examine the radiative extinction limit, the following
parameters will be varied: (i) Fuel type (chemical structure) and concentration; (ii)
Ambient oxygen concentration; (iii) Fuel injection velocity; (iv) Ambient pressure.
Temperature and radiation measurements made under these conditions will then enable
us to understand the radiative extinction phenomenon. These experiments will soon
begin in the NASA Lewis 2.2 sec p.g drop tower. A schematic of the test apparatus for
these experiments is shown in Figure Ia and lb.

(ii)

An axis-symmetric low slrain rale counterflow dijJusionjlame: This geometry is adopted
for the ground-based experiments and modeling because it provides a constant strain rate
flow field which is one-dimensional in temperature and species concentrations. The
strain rate is directly related to the imposed flow velocity and the one-dimensionality of
this flame simplifies experimental measurements and analysis. Also, there are no solid
boundaries which may quench the flame prior to extinction caused by low or high strain
rates . Experiments on counterflow diffusion flames are currently being performed to
determine the soot particle formation and oxidation rates. Two types of flames are being
investigated : (a) A low strain rate diffusion flame which lies on the oxidizer side of the
stagnation plane. Here , as shown in Figures 2a and 2b , all the soot produced is
convected away from the flame toward the stagnation plane. (b) A low strain rate
diffusion flame which lies on the fuel side of the stagnation plane. Here, as shown in
Figures 3a and 3b, all the soot produced is convected into the diffusion flame. This
enhances flame radiation as the soot is oxidized. This geometry is especially relevant to
the p.g experiments described above. The results of the ground-based experiments are
being used in a transient model to predict the radiative extinction limit and the conditions
under which it occurs.

PROGRESS TO DATE

Although this project started in April 1991 , we have made considerable progress on the
fo llowing items:
J.lg experiments: The test apparatus has been designed to produce a spherical diffusion flame
using a low heat capacity spherical burner constructed from porous alumina. A schematic of
this apparatus is shown in Figure lao It consists of a drop frame that contains the test chamber,
ignition system , batteries , electrical control system, and high-speed motion-picture camera. The
diffusion flame is supported by the burner inside a cylindrical test chamber. This test chamber
can be evacuated and filled with any desired gas mixture from below atmospheric pressure to
5 atm. A 5" clear lexan window enables the camera to photograph the spherical diffusion flame.
The fuel flow system , shown in Figure I b, consists of a fuel supply line from the gas cylinder
that is controlled by a metering valve and turned on and off with a solenoid valve. The porous,
spherical burner and other drop rig apparatus components have been successfully tested in
normal gravity conditions. Microgravity testing will begin early in September and will continue
through December of 1994.

116

l-g experiments: The supporting ground-based experiments have already started. Figures 2(a,b)
and 3(a,b) show the two types of flames being investigated. Since the flame on the fuel side of
the stagnation plane is directly related to the spherical microgravity flame, it is being
investigated first. Figure 4 shows the measured soot volume fraction and the temperature
distribution inside this flame. The fuel and oxidizer concentrations and the strain rate for this
flame are 22.9% , 32.6% and 8 sec·l respectively. Figure 5 shows the measured concentrations
of stable gases inside this flame. It is extremely interesting to note that only CO and H2 exist
after the luminous flame zone. These are later burned in the blue flame above the luminous
flame. Also , the CO concentration is greater than 2 % and is substantially larger than the
corresponding flame on the oxidizer side of the stagnation plane. This may be an important
source of CO in building fires .
Theoretical investigation: To investigate the extinction limits of diffusion flames, the work of
Linan (ref. 3 & 4) was reviewed and the simple case of a one-dimensional, diffusion flame with
flame radiation is being examined. This model corresponds to the ground-based experiments
described above. As a first step we have assumed zero gravity, no convection, constant
properties, one-step irreversible reaction and unity Lewis number. These equations are being
numerically integrated to examine the conditions under which radiation-induced extinction
occurs. The soot formati on and oxidation rates will be obtained from the counterflow diffusion
flame experiments.
FUTURE PLANS

In the near future we plan to focus our attention on the following items:
1. Perform microgravity experiments on spherical diffusion flames for different fuels
and under various atmospheres.
2. Continue our work on supporting ground-based experiments at low strain rates to
quantify soot formation and oxidation rates and flame radiation for the same fuels and
atmospheres used in the p.g experiments.
3. Complete our theoretical model for zero strain rate (no flow) flames in microgravity
and identify conditions under which radiation-induced extinction occurs.
4. To analyze the experimental results and develop an appropriate theoretical model for
spherical diffusion fl ames with flame radiation.
REFERENCES

1.

Ross, H. D. , Sows, R. G. and T'ien, 1. 5., Combustion Science and Technology, Vol.
75,

2.

3.
4.

pp. 155-160, 1991.
T'ien,l. 5., Combustion and Flame, Vol. 80, pp. 355-357, 1990.
Linan, A. , Acta Astronautica, Vol. 1, pp. 1007-1039 , 1974.
Linan, A., Crespo, A., Combustion Science and Technology, Vol. 14, pp. 95-117.

117

i

I
,

I

i

I

- - - Solenoid Valve

I

i '

!

O-OACS

I
I

I

I

,----'1
•

I

I· Video Camera

I

~~.I~
I
I

r

I

~

ill)

Porous Burner and Ignrror

I
Test Chamber

i

Electrical Sy stem

I
I
I

I

!

11,-_ _---'
!
Fig. la. Drop Rig Apparatus

f--.

Reducer

Rupture Disk

1/4" to 111 6"

~
II

24 V Solenoid
Valve

I

High Precision
Needle Valve

lD

Spherical Diffusion Rame

Fig. l b. Gas Supply System

150 cc Gas Cylinder

Test Chamber and Burner /

Fig. la. and lb. Microgravity spherical diffusion flame apparatus
for 2.2 second drop tower.

118

)

-

----- ------

Fig. 2a. Low strain rate, sooty counterflow diffusion
flame on the oxidizer side of the stagnation plane

Fig. 2b. Same as Fig. 2a. TIle TiCl 4 streak shows the
The
location of the stagnation plane

Fig. 3a. Low strain rate, sooty counterflow diffusion
countert1ow
plane
flame on the fuel side of the stagnation plan~

Fig. 3b. Same as Fig. 3a. The TiCl 4 strt;ak shows the
TiCI streak
location of the stagnation plane

.....
.....

\0

~

g
~

~

f4

(D

o

t

20 0 0 -

~. .

TV

Q)
U
Q)

-0

...

1800 -

/

3
,

,--...

n

\

E

v

160 0 -

0

e

1400 -

0

,..

.0

l

uE

V

v

l

1-1

v

'---"

600 I
-20

'---"

v

I

0

T

0

-10

0

X

v

.~ l~

./

I
r-

v

i

~

800-

r--- ~
Q»

v

...~

T

l-

LL

EQ)

v

~

:::s::.
f-

n

T

1000 -

,--...

(1)0

v
v

.,

I-

':::>~
0
o
ou

V

T

1200 -

-0

f-2

V

T

.....,
0

..,
I

~
T

U

U C

v

~

L

I-

10

20

Z(mm), stagnation plane at 0
SOXl f lame
Fi2. 4. Soot Panicle Volume Fraction and Temperature Profile

10
6
6

0

8Z
0

6

6

«
cr:::

0

6

W
U

0

Z

40

~

0

.. ..

..

..

..

'I'

0

•

~
0

T
6

V
0

0

0

2-

0

0

U

'I'

..

0

0

6

z

6

0

2

6-

00

0

6

0

f-

0

6

6

f-

.

6

'I'

V
0

III

W
6

'I'

0

0

0
ED

0

1 '"
-10
~

'"

'" T '"

-8

'"

.,

II!

I

II! '" III ,. '"

-6

III

-1

I

-4

-2

Z(mm), stagnat ion plane at 0
SO X l flame
Fig. 5. Concentranon mfiles of Stable Gases

120

CH 1

{::,

0

0
-12

CO2

0

0

0

7 x H2
4 x CO
2 x 02

~

, .

--

SOOT FORMATION AND RADIATION IN TURBULENT JET DIFFUSION
FLAMES UNDER NORMAL AND REDUCED GRAVITY CONDITIONS
Jerry C. Ku, Li Tong, and Jun Sun
Wayne State University
Detroit, Michigan 48202
Paul S. Greenberg
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Devon W. Griffin
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
Brook Park, Ohio 44142

Introduction
Most practical combustion processes, as well as fires and explosions, exhibit some
characteristics of turbulent diffusion flames. For hydrocarbon fuels, the presence of
soot particles significantly increases the level of radiative heat transfer from flames.
In some cases, flame radiation can reach up to 75% of the heat release by combustion
(ref. 1). Laminar diffusion flame results (ref. 2) show that radiation becomes stronger
under reduced gravity conditions. Therefore, detailed soot formation and radiation
must be included in the flame structure analysis. A study of sooting turbulent
diffusion flames under reduced-gravity conditions will not only provide necessary
information for such practical issues as spacecraft fire safety, but also develop better
understanding of fundamentals for diffusion combustion.
Experimentally, full-field laser light transmission and thermophoretic soot particle
sampling techniques will be used to measure flame soot particulate size and number
density. Flame temperature will be measured using full-field two-color pyrometry
and fine-gage thermocouples. These experiments are conducted in a drop tower.
On modeling, the focus is on complete coupling of flame structure, soot formation,
and radiation. The conserved scalar approach based on Favre-averaged governing
equations, k-E-g turbulence model, and an assumed probability density function is
used to predict flow field and gaseous species mole fractions profiles (refs. 3 and 4). A
soot formation model developed by Syed et al. (refs. 5 and 6) will be modified to
predict soot particle volume fraction and number density. The energy equation is
incorporated to provide a full coupling between flame structure and radiation. The
radiative heat flux is calculated from the radiative transfer equation (RTE) for a
finite axisymmetric cylindrical enclosure, which will be solved by the P 3 spherical
harmonics approximation (ref. 7).
In this paper, a summary of the work to date and of future plans is reported.

121

Exp erimental Results

Experiments are conducted using a 2.2-second drop rig. The rig is now instrumented
for thermophore tic soot particle sampling and full-field laser light transmission
measurements. Thermocouple and two-color pyrometry measurement are planned.
Details for experiments are reported in another paper in this workshop (ref. 8).
Results were collected for laminar flames first to validate our setup and procedure.
The nozzle has a diameter of 1.7 mm. Propane and ethylene at 1.0 and 1.5 eel sec are
tested. Micrographs of soot aggregates in 1.5 eel sec propane-air diffusion flames are
shown in Fig. 1. The significant difference in aggregate size (or number of primary
particles per aggregate) between normal and reduced gravity conditions is noted, and
this has been observed for all fuel and flow rate combinations.
Fig. 2 shows the mean diameter of primary soot particles as a function of height
above nozzle exit. The size distribution, deduced from more than 100 particles per
sample, agrees well with the normal distribution and 95 % of the population falls in
±1O nm range. Incipient soot particles are larger under a-g . This seems to support the
argument that incipient soot starts as liquid droplets, whose dynamics is affected by
the relative dominance of surface tension. Under O-g, the oxidation stage seems to be
much weaker for the 1.5 cclsec case, so flames may smoke (i.e., release soot particles) .
It is therefore concluded that rates of nucleation, growth, coagulation, and oxidation
are very different between 1-g and a-g. O-g data are needed for determining these rate
constants in models . Larger aggregate and primary particle sizes mean that radiation
heat transfer is even more significant under O-g (ref. 9).
The full-field laser light transmission experiment has been tested for a 1-g flame.
Soot volume fraction for a section as tall as 4.5 em was measured instantaneously
using a CCD camera. Results agree well with point-by-point measurements .

Modeling of Turbulent let Diffusion Flame
Following the conserved scalar approach, the structure of an axisymmetric turbulent
diffusion flame is modeled using Favre-averaged boundary layer flow equations for
conservation of mass, momentum, and mixture fraction described by Bilger (ref. 10),
and a k-£-g turbulence model proposed by Lockwood and Naguib (ref. 11). The
governing equations can be written in a general form as (refs. 12)
-a (--A.) +-- Crpv¢ ) =la( rJl
pu,/, la __
--

ax

r ar

r ar

a¢)
- +s ,
qr.f ar
•

(1)

where ¢ = 1 (continuity), u (axial velocity), j (mixture fraction), k (turbulence kinetic
energy), £ (turbulence dissipation), or g (mixture fraction variance). Favre-averaged
(mass weighted) quantities are defined as ~ = p¢fp, whereas an overbar represents
conventional time-averaging. Details for Jl'ff .• (effective viscosity) and S. (source
term) can be found in the references. Buoyancy effects will only be considered in the
mean flow equation, neglecting buoyancy-turbulence interactions.
122

I

_J

Assuming all instantaneous scalar properties are functions of the mixture fraction
only, termed the state relationships, the Favre-averaged mean and variance of scalar
properties can be determined from an assumed probability density function (pdf).
The mixture fraction is described as the mass fraction of fuel atoms anywhere in the
flame and by virtue of its definition it is invariant with chemical reaction (so it is a
conserved scalar). This allows the fluid mechanics to be decoupled from chemical
reactions, and it is a good approximation if the rate of chemical reaction is limited by
turbulent mixing and not by chemical kinetics (Le. fast chemistry at equilibrium)
and the diffusivities of all species and heat are equal.
The system represented by Eq. (1) is solved using a block-tridiagonal code written by
Chen (ref. 13). Major gaseous species concentrations are then calculated based on the
state relationships constructed from thermodynamic equilibrium (adiabatic flame)
calculations using STANJAN (ref. 14) and a /3-pdf. This has been found accurate for

nonluminous and fuel-lean regions of luminous flames, but fails for rich regions of
luminous flames. For better accuracy, the laminar flamelet approach (refs. 15 and
16), with the state relationships constructed from laminar flame data, may be used.

Modeling of Soot Formation and Oxidation
Compared to gaseous specious, soot inception is a much slower reaction, and soot
particles have very different diffusivities. In addition, soot particles are subjected to
turbulent mixing, thermophore tic forces, and strong radiation heat transfer effects.
The structure analysis outlined above has been extended to model soot forma tion
and oxidation. Magnussen and Hjertager (ref. 17) introduced rate equation models
for both nucleation Cbased on number density) and surface-growth (based on mass
concentration) stages. They used an energy equation in the form of Eq. (1), with the
source term for radiation, which is calculated using a two-flux model. Gore and
Faeth (ref. 4) constructed state relationships for soot volume fractions from laminar
flame data, and for temperature from equilibrium combustion calculation with a
fixed fraction of chemical energy release lost by radiation. Kent and Honnery (ref. 18)
found that the state-relationship approach for soot volume fractions may work in
the top oxidation portion of the flame, where turbulent mixing dominates, but not
the lower inception portion, where chemical kinetics dominates. They calculated
4
the temperature from an energy equation with a radiation term of [-£<T(T -T:)/l].
It is believed that the rate-equation model approach is more accurate for predicting

soot formation and oxidation. Kennedy et al. (refs. 19 and 20) applied Eq. (1) for soot
volume fraction in laminar diffusion flames. The soot volume fraction source term
was replaced by rate equation models derived for nucleation, growth, and oxidation
with an assumed average number density. An energy equation similar to that in
Kent and Honnery (ref. 18) was used. The model predicts peak soot volume fractions
fairly accurately, but not their radial distributions. We adopt a two-equation model,
derived by Moss et al. (ref. 6) and Syed et al. (ref. 5), for soot number density (N) and
volume fraction (fy). The model agrees well with measured flat (Wolfhard-Parker)
diffusion flame data. The model has been modified (ref. 21) to couple with reduced
123

chemical reaction mechanisms, and successfully predicted radiation heat transfer
from a turbulent reacting jet in a cross-wind (ref. 22) .

Since the model applies Eq. (1) to describe the transport of soot particles in terms of
Favre-averaged number density and volume fraction, it can be easily incorporated
into the reacting turbulent free-shear flow code. Rate equation models, representing
nucleation, surfaced growth, coagulation, and oxidation, are used in source terms as
S. =a -

)J

p2(p: Jn!"XP( p:T"(;,
X)p(P:. )"'(p:

r

S. = n:"(j'-

r·~ P: ;
=

~ = P:.

-C,a •

;

(2)
(3)

where no = 6 x 10 26 is Avogadro's number and Ps is the mass density of solid carbon
(typically 1.8-2 .0g / cm 3) . The rate constants a, {3, fj and X are modeled in terms of
mixture density 15 , activation temperatures Ta and Tr , and fuel mole fraction Xc' as

a =Cap2T1I2Xc exp(-Ta/T) ,

(4)
(5)

{3 = Cp Tl12 ,

r = Crp Tl/2 Xc exp( -

Tr

IT) ,

(6)
(7)

X = Cz Tl/2Xox exp(-TzIT) ,

wherein coefficients and temperatures are determined from experimental data. In
Eg. (7), Xox = XOH if f ~ 0.064 (fuel-rich), and Xox = 0.045Xo, if f < 0.064 (fuel-lean). The
effective viscosities are given in the form of
I1'Jf.~

where

(5,

_ 11, _ pCu ejc
--,
(5,

(8)

(5,

are determined from experimental data and

e)l

is the same as that for U.

Flame Radiation Heat Transfer Calculation
Radiation is fully coupled with flame structure analysis through an energy equation
given in the form of Eq. (1) with tP =if (total enthalpy) and S, =-V· q,Dd' Turbulenceradiation interactions are neglected. Gore et al. (ref. 23), using a multi-ray method to
calculate the radiative heat flux qrDd' showed that the coupled analysis predicts more
accurately than the uncoupled one. However, their work neglected the scattering by
soot particles, but accounted for the effects of turbulence-radiation interactions.
The radiative transfer equation (RIE) for axisymmetric finite cylindrical enclosures
such as for jet diffusion flames can be expressed as (ref. 7)

[1(~

tr - ;

:~ + iz )+ t}<r. 9.4>.z) = (1- aI)/,[T(r.z)]
J1
124

~

-

--

-- - - .

-.~

- --I

-

+ 4~J:~Jo~ l(r,O,¢,z)<P(O,¢ ,O',¢')sinO'dJ' dp' .

(9)

Here, the subscript). d 2noting spectral quantities has been left off, I is intensity (with
subscript b for blackbody), f3 is the extinction coefficient, OJ is the single scattering
albedo, ~,1], and I-L are direction cosines, and (/) is the phase function. Both {3 and ware
functions of position (r, z) for axisymmetric diffusion flames.
Menguc and Viskanta (ref. 7) derived a solution using the P3 spherical harmonics
approximation with the delta-Eddington approximation for the phase function. For
soot agglomerates, the phase function can be better approximated by a third order
Legendre polynomial series (ref. 9) given as
3

C1J(O,¢,O',¢') = 1+

L a,. P,.(cos '1') ,

(10)

,,=1

where ljI is the scattering angle and cos ljI = ~~' + 1]1]' + J11-L', and coefficients a,. are to be
determined. Applying the spherical harmonics approximation, the model equations
are obtained by employing the following integrations
r2~r~

Jo Jo [Equation

•

(9)]Y,,'" sinOdJdp,

(11)

for n =0, I, ... Nand m =-n, -n+l, ... n, with N being the order of the PH approximation.
The spherical harmonics f,,'" (superscript ,.. denotes the complex conjugate) can be
replaced with multiples of direction cosines. Define the moments of intensity as
r2~

lo(r,z) = J

o

[If

Jo l (r ,O,¢,z)sin OdJ dp ,

(12a)
(12b)

'*

where each of the direction cosines ~, ii' and is ~,1], or I-L • Physically, the zeroth
moment is the total incident radiation, whereas the first moments are radiative heat
fluxes along the coordinate axis. The divergence of radiative heat flux vector, which
appears in the energy equation, can then be calculated from
V·qrad =f3(1-w){41l1b [T(r,z)]-10(r,z)}=S(r,z).

(13)

After some manipulations, results obtained from Eq. (11) can be combined into four
coup led elliptical partial differential equations for 101 Ill! 1331 and 113 , The model
equation for is given as
[483 (r". +fu )+t(4BJ +7~)fr + ,\

(-16~ +148 )+ 730 8 z 'f2}0 =_3;'f2 ~ +1\,
1

(14)

where 8's are functions of a" and W, 'f = {3 rO A 1 is a function of 8 , 'f, f Wl331 and 1131 and
f is the derivative operator. These model equations together with 16 Marshak's
boundary conditions derived for diffusely emitting and reflecting opaque boundary,
are solved numerically using a solver called ELLPACK (ref. 24).
I

l

125

To incorporate radiation calculations into the overall flame structure analysis, there
are two major difficulties to be overcome. First is that equations for the moment of
intensity such as Eq. (14) are elliptical, whereas equations represented by Eq. (1) are
parabolic. It seems impossible to solve both systems simultaneously. An alternative,
which we are testing now, is to iterate between these two systems until the results
numerically converged. The second difficulty is on modeling the spectral radiative
properties for integrating the RTE over the spectral range. We will first follow the
wide-band approach used by Song and Viskanta (ref. 25).

Preliminary Results and Discussion
We first tested the flame structure and soot formation/ oxidation predictions against
results in Kent and Honnery (ref. 18) for an ethylene-air turbulent diffusion flame
(nozzle diameter D = 3 mm, exit velocity U o = 52 m/sec, ReD = 9615). Good agreement
was found for mixture fractions. Fig. 3 shows the comparison for the temperature
along the centerline and radially at A / A = 0.4, 0.7 ex",= 115D) . The dashed curve is from
adiabatic combustion calculation, and the solid curve from a correction (ref. 21)
1ft

(15)
where Tad is the adiabatic temperature, T..ax is the maximum adiabatic temperature,
and 0.09 < b < 0.15. Even Eq. (15) still over-predicts at the flame tip and outer edge.
This demonstrates the importance of including the energy equation and detailed
radiation heat transfer calculations.
Fig. 4 shows that the soot formation/ oxidation model predicts soot volume fraction
accurately. The over-prediction near the outer edge is caused by that of temperature .
Fig. 5 shows the temperature and soot volume fraction contours, calculated using
the same rate coefficients, for one of our test conditions (ReD = 536, Re I. ::: 7400) . The
temperature contour shows a much taller and wider O-g flame, as expected . The O-g
flame soot volume fraction contour is obviously unreasonable, since different rate
constants are needed as concluded from laminar flame data. A reasonable prediction
is possible by decreasing the level of oxidation for O-g, which agrees with laminar
flame results. O-g measurements are needed for determining the rate constants.
The implementation of a iterative process between the RTE and the flame structure
solvers has not been completed. Some numerical problems have been experienced,
which are believed to be caused by zero f3 in part of the cylindrical enclosure where
there is no flame. Fig. 6 shows the results of a forward calculation of the terms in the
energy equation. Referring to Eq. (1) with 4> = Hand S, = -v ·Qrad' those two terms on
the left are convection terms, and the first term on the right is conduction with the
last term being radiation. The first three terms are calculated using total enthalpy
from the adiabatic combustion calculation for I-g. The last term is calculated using
the temperature from Fig. 5 with an assumed uniform soot volume fraction of 10·s .
It is clear that all these terms are of about the same magnitude, and the radiation
126

r
1

!
term depends strongly on location. This confirms the importance of incorporating
detailed radiation calculation into the flame structure analysis.
The modeling can be im proved by accounting for interactions between turbulence
and radiation (refs. 12 and 25), and between turbulence and buoyancy (ref. 22). The
latter should be an important factor between 1-g and O-g conditions.
Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to J.-Y. Chen of UC/Berkeley for providing the solver code
for turbulent reacting free-shear flows and John Roma of Baldwin Wallace College
for electron microscopy and size analysis works.

References
1. H. A. Becker and D. Liang, "Soot Emission, Thermal Radiation, and Laminar

Instability of Acetylene Diffusion Flames," Comb. Flame, Vol. 52, 247-256, 1983.
2. R B. Edelman, M. Y. Bahadori, S. L. Olson, and D. P. and Stocker, "Laminar
Diffusion Flames Under Micro-Gravity Conditions," AIAA-88-064S, AIAA 26th
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, Nevada, 1988.
3. S.-M. Jeng and G. M. Faeth, "Species Concentrations and Turbulent Properties in
Buoyant Methane Diffusion Flames," J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 106, 721-727, 1984.
4. J. P. Gore and G. M. Faeth, "Structure and Spectral Radiation Properties of Turbulent Ethylene/ Air Diffusion Flames," 21st Symp. (Int.) Comb., 1521-1531, 1986.
5. K. J. Syed, C. D. Stewart, and J. B. Moss, "Modeling Soot Formation and Thermal
Radiation in Buoyant Turbulent Diffusion Flames," 23rd Symp. (Int.) Comb.,
1533-1541, 1990.
6.

J.

B. Moss, C. D. Stewart, and K. J. Syed, "Flow field Modeling of Soot Formation
at Elevated Pressure," 22nd Symp. (Int.) Comb., 413-423, 1988.

7. Menguc, M. P., and Viskanta, R, 1986, "Radiative Transfer in Axisymmetric,
Finite Cylindrical Enclosures," J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 108, 271-276.
8. D. Griffin and P. S. Greenberg, "Selected Microgravity Combustion Diagnostics
Techniques," 2nd Int. Microgravity Comb. Workshop, Cleveland, Ohio, 1992.
9. J. c. Ku and K.-H. Shim, "Optical Diagnostics and Radiative Properties of
Simulated Soot Agglomerates," J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 113, 953-958, 1991.
10. R W. Bilger, "Turbulent Jet Diffusion Flames," Prog. Energy Comb. Sci., Vol. 1,
87-109, 1976.
11. F. C. Lockwood and A. S. Naguib" "The Prediction of the Fluctuations in the
Properties of Free, Round-Jet Turbulent Diffusion Flames," Comb. Flame, Vol.
24, 109-124, 1975.
12. G. M. Faeth, S.-M. Jeng, and J. Gore, "Radiation from Fires," ASME HTD-Vol. 45
Heat Transfer in Fire and Combustion Systems, 137-151, 1985.
127

13. }.-Y. Chen, W. Kollmann, and R. W . Dibble, "Numerical Computation of
Turbulent Free-Shear Flows Using a Block-Tridigonal Solver for a Staggered
Grid System," 18th Annual Pittsburgh Conf. Modeling and Simulation, 1987.
14. W . C. Reynolds, "The Element Potential Method for Chemical Equilibrium
Analysis: Implementation in the Interactive Program STANJAN," Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, 1986.
15. R. W. Bilger, "Reaction Rates in Diffusion Flames," Comb. Flame, Vol. 30, 277284, 1977.
16. S. K. Liew, N . C. Bray, and J. B. Moss, "A Flamelet Model of Turbulent NonPremixed Combustion," Comb. Sci. Tech., Vol. 27, 69-73, 1981 .
17. B. F. Magnussen and B. H. Hjertager, "On Mathematical Modeling of Turbulent
Combustion with Special Emphasis on Soot Formation and Combustion," 16th
Symp. (Int.) Comb, 719-729, 1976.
18.

J. H . Kent and D. Honnery, "Soot and Mixture Fraction in Turbulent Diffusion
Flames," Comb. Sci. Tech., Vol. 54, 383-397, 1987.

19. I. M. Kennedy, W. Kollmann, and J.-Y. Chen, "A Model for Soot Formation in a
Laminar Diffusion Flame, " Comb. Flame, Vol. 81, 73-85, 1990.
20. I. M. Kenned y, W. Kollmann, and J.- Y. Chen, "Predictions of Soot in Laminar
Diffusion Flames," AIAA Journal, Vol. 29, 1452-1457, 1991.
21. K. M. Leung, R. P. Lindstedt, and W. P. Jones, "A Simplified Reaction Mechanism
for Soot Formation in Nonpremixed Flames," Comb. Flame, Vol. 87,289-305, 1991 .
22. M. Fairweather, W. P. Jones, and R. P. Lindstedt, "Predictions of Radiative
Transfe r from a Turbulent Reacting Jet in a Cross-Wind," Comb. Flame, Vol. 89,
45-63, 1992.
23. J. P. Gore, U.-S. Ip, and Y. R. Sivathanu, "Coupled Structure and Radiation
Analysis of Acetylene/ Air Flames," J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 114, 487-493, 1992.
24. }. R. Rice and R. F. Boisvert, Solving Elliptic Problems Using ELLPACK ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985.
25. T. H. Song and R. Viskanta, "Interaction of Radiation with Turbulence:
Application to a Combustion System," J. Thermophysics, Vol. 1, 56-62, 1987.

128

-

..
~

...

~­

.

-;s.. -

.!,

---

~----------~-------------------~-- --- .

(a) I-g flame, 40 m m HAB

0.3 Jlm

(b) O-g flame, 80 mm HAB

1 Jlm

Figure 1. :\1icrographs o f soot aggregates in 1.5 ccl sec propane-air laminar d iffusion
fla mes u nde r (a) normal, and (b) reduced gravity conditions. 0.7 mm nozzle dia.)

129

~

~?---------------------------------..,

~

I::

.

.h

~~

Prooono
• 0 : lO

::12

.o:~cc/..c
~Q

h

~

cc.Io«:

: ~

~ :000'"
I)

2~______________________________________~

(I~~

• 0 :
•

D :

to

cc}atc
15 cc/ ..c

1-; : C)gen

0-9 : tol-cl

2
M)

20

10

~

40

60

10

7'0

to

no

100

~

K

~

H.~ Above Nonie (xjj ("..,.,)

d

~

ro

~

~

~

~

~

He.c;nt Above Nozzie Exit (mm)

Figure 2. Mean diameter of primary soot particles in laminar diffusion flames .
o

g ~----------------------------------~

~,----------------------------------------;

on

70l-....-,...-.J.~~~!-.a-....:--:---

N

0= J mrn
U.=~2

..

~~

C,H.-Air

..

mi.

20
00

'-0

CD -

a.

•

Eg
~'"
o+-________________________

•

~----------~

o
o

g~-------------------------------------,
...

--- : odiob. comb.
: corrected odiob. comb.
• : Kenl at Honnery (1987)
o~

o

______

~

50

______

~

______

,00

~

____________

150

•
• •
•
o+-____________________________________

•

~

200

250

0

10

x/D

15

20

25

Radial Distance r/R

Figure 3. Comparisons of predicted and measured turbulent flame temperatures .

o~--------------------------------------------------,
6

-_

_ ... 6

CZH -Air

0=1 mm, u ~ m/•

......

Ken!

.....

at

"",";"ry

-- 0

••••••• 0

6 ....

...•.

6

•

[19!17]

';'",=0 .4
,;.",=0.7
';'",=1.0
';·m=1.4

0"1

00
Vl

0 .0

~. O

.

.

10.0

15.0

20 .0

25.0

30 .0

Radia Distance r/R

Figure 4. Predicted and measured turbulen \ flame soot volume fractions .

l30

~

30

1o

o

II>

0-9 Temperot"re 'lop

IO=o.~a

"''''.U.=l!> mI.1

II>

g,-----------------------------~

g,-----------------------------~

o

ci

'!l
o
ci

o

o
o

.

o

o

o

II>

on
....

...

o
..,

ci

o

o

o
o
....

o

o
..,

o
o
o

o

o
o
N

o

. .1/

N

o
ci

I

o
!!!

!!!

o

o

o

ci
51

51

o

o

on

o

on

o

ci+-__________
o

ci

O~------------~~~----------~
-2~.0
~o.o
0.0
2~.0

-!>o.o

-!>o.o

0.0

__________
25.0

~

!>o.o

r/D

r/D
1-9 Soot Volume ,radion Mop (1,.10']

o

-2~ . 0

~~~

o

0-9 Soot Volume ,raction Wop (1,. '0' ]

g~----------------------------~

g~----------------------------~

on

on

o
o

o

o

'!l

'!l

o
o
o

o
o
o

o

o

...

...

ci

on

....

o

on
....

o

o

o
o

o
..,

ci

....
0

0

,,~
)(

N

o

o

o

ci

N

N

o

o

o

o
o

'!!

!!!

o

o

o

o

o

ci
51

ci
51

ci
on

ci
on
o

~+_---------------------J .0
-!>o.o
-2!>.0
0.0
25.0
50
1D
r
/D
Figure 5. Normal- and reduced-gravity ethylene-air turbulent diffusion flames.
ci~------------------------------~

-50.0

-25.0

0.0

25.0

50.0

131

N~________________________________________________________~

:'

""''''''.

~
. /.

"1

",

9N

".

.

-

:,:

", ·· · f

i

>-

(Jl

C,-.,
i
I

C

I
I

E -i
I

....

l\//

L

~

C2 H 4 - Air
0=0.58 mm , U ~ = 15 m/ s
x/ 0=70

/

:

~~

VlCO

t·
.

f··

o ~.
::J
o-N

W

.:

,,
'.,

.:

:

'.

o

W

:

f

'. :

l

.~~'
-',:,;~'::;;;:..----------------------I

rJ . . .· ···

'"

. '--~

C

/

/

/

- - - : Radi. term
•••••• • : COnY. term 1
..... . : Cony. term 2
- _ .- : Con a. te rm

C?

~ ~------------------------------------------------------------~
50.0
40 .0
10 .0
0 .0
20 .0
30.0
Radial Distance riD
,-.,

o~------------------------------------------------------~

... ;.......... .-

r
,-.,- - " '

Eo

",,/.

~o

,//'

'"0,-.,

:/ )'

'="'0
C

o
o
::J

W

'./f..,/. . . . .
i

I

~

lO

0- 0

'~"....;'.:.,..:"""-...,.;::::..--------~.....-.,..
.

.

i

f
f

>-

I

C2 H 4 -A ir
0=0 .58 mm, U~=15 m/ s
x/D=140

(Jl

~ ~

CO

Wi
C

,

I

10

I

~,/ /
<--'/

/

--.••••• •
... ...... .....
- _ .-

:
:
:
:

Radi. term
Cony. term 1
Cony. term 2
Condo te rm

~------------------------------------------------------~
50.0
10.0
40 .0
0.0
20.0
30.0
Radial Distance riD

Figure 6. Estimated values of various terms in the energy equation with radiation.
132

COMMENTS
Question (J.P. Gore, Purdue University):
(1) What is the magnitude of turbule nce-radiation interactions, and what is the justification for neglecting
this effect in preference to scattering? Scattering is more important in optical diagnostics in the visible
rather than in the thermal radiation term in energy equations.
(2) The effects of joint probability distribution functions betwcen mixture fraction and enthalpy are
important. Do you plan to model these?
(3) Are the soot volume fraction data from Ke nt and Honnery (1987) path-integrated equivaknt
measurements? If so, how is the comparison with predictions made?
(4) Chemical equilibrium calculations are not in agreement with measurements on the fuel-rich side. Should
the model be improved in this aspect?
(5) In your verbal response you mentioned that there are other uncertainties s uch as refractive indices of
soot. However, work reported in the literature has shown that items (1), (2) a nd (4) ahove have a very
strong (even order of magnitude) inlluence on radiation heat loss. In my opinion , these need to he
addresscd with prioritv.
Answer: (J) There is no altempt at this point to model or estimate the magnitude of turbukn ce-radiatio n
interaction, or to justify that it is negligible . The turbulence-radiation interaction is not included due to its
complexity and the lack of definitive information about its effects. On the other hand. the scaltering effects
have been shown to be significant (Ref. 9) and can be dealt with in our radiation heat transfer calculations.
(2) We agree that the effects of joint pdf between mixture fraction and enthalpy are important and should be
included in the model. However, this will not be our focus . In stead, we plan to follow works in existence,
such as those by the commentator (Ref. 23), and those developed in the future.
(3) We believc that soot mlulllc fraction data in Kent &. Honnery (Ref. Ii-!) arc loca l values, instead of pathintegrated. The last sente nce in the second paragraph in Experim ental Pmcetiure sta tes th at hori;r(lntal
traversing and Abel im'crsion wt:re applied to extract local extinction data .
(4 ) Yes. We will impnJ\'c this aspect of th e model by using the liiminar Il<ime/ct model,
paper.

itS

indicilted in t he

(5) One may argue that soot refractive index data are fairly accurate in the visible wavelengths, en:n though
we arc not perfectly convinced of thal. However, it is fair to say that data in the infrared arc highly
questionable. Since there is no directly related analysis on the effects of this uncertainty, we plan to
investigate this aspect more quantitatively.

Question: (h'an Calton, UCLA): In transport processes, one is usually interested in number density an ti a
mean diameter. Your eleclron micrographs show shapes as far from spherical, and one has tlJ wonder what
the "mean diameter" represents.
Answer: We consider soot particulales as aggregates of near-spherical primary parlicles. The shapes, as
referred to in the question, are shapes of aggregates. The mean diameters, as referred to in the paper, are
mean diameters of the near-spherical primary particles.

133

VISUALIZATION AND IMAGING METHODS FOR FLAMES IN
MICROGRAVITV
Karen J. Weiland
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland , Ohio 44135

Introduction
The visualization and imaging of flames has long been acknowledged as the starting point for learning
about and understanding combustion phenomena. It provides an essential overall picture of the time
and length scales of processes and guides the application of other diagnostics. It is perhaps even more
important in microgravity combustion studies. where it is often the only non-intrusive diagnostic
measurement easily implemented. Imaging also aids in the interpretation of single-point measurements.
such as temperature. provided by thennocouples. and velocity, by hot-wire anemometers. TIlls paper
outlines the efforts of the Microgravity Combustion Diagnostics staff at NASA Lewis Research Center
in the area of visualization and imaging of flames. concentrating on methods applicable for reducedgravity experimentation. Several techniques are Wlder development: intensified array camera imaging,
automated object tracking hardware and software, reactive Mie scattering, infrared emission imaging
and two-dimensional temperature and species concentrations measurements. A brief summary of results
in these areas is presented and future plans mentioned.

Qualitative Visualization

In many microgravity combustion studies. the systems of most interest lie near the limits of
flammability, ignition, or stability. and typically have a dim. blue flame. Difficulties in detecting and
imaging these flames using conventional photographic media or video cameras motivate the examination
and demonstration of advanced imaging techniques. One approach we have explored is the use of
intensified array cameras based on both charge injection device (CID) and charge coupled device (CCD)
arrays. The camera contains a microchannel plate intensifier consisting of a photocathode, which
converts the photons entering it from the lens into electrons; a microchannel plate. which multiplies
the number of electrons; and a phosphor anode. which converts the electrons back into photons. The
luminous sensitivity of the camera is increased thereby as much as four orders of magnitude and allows
a faceplate illuminance of 10-6 to 10-5 lux to be detected. Photocathodes sensitive in the visible to nearinfrared from 400 to 900 nm and in the ultraviolet from 250 to 650 nm are in use. The output from
the camera is available as a RS-170A video signal.
Intensified array cameras have been demonstrated in our I-g laboratory by imaging several combustion
systems, specifically, dilute premixed hydrogen flames, low-pressure gas jet diffusion flames, premixed
BurJSen-type flames, solid surface, and low-pressure droplet burning. Results have been obtained using
both the visible to near-infrared and ultraviolet photocathodes. Examples of some of these flames are
shown in Fig. 1 and 2. Dilute mixtures of hydrogen and air (7% hydrogen) have been imaged by both
cameras without the addition of a Halon colorant. previously needed to detect the flames using
photographic film . . The image shown in Fig. 1, obtained with the visible to near-infrared camera, is
stronger than that obtained using the ultraviolet camera. The cameras are detecting light from different
emitters: the visible to near-infrared detects the emission in the near-infrared from the hot water
produced in the flame, but the ultraviolet camera detects light from the OH radical centered at 308 nm.

135

Preceding Page Blank

The camera is also able to detect a small, laminar, hydrogen gas jet diffusion flame burning at a total
pressure of 100 Torr, which is invisible to the eye. Both cameras have also imaged premixed Bunsentype methane flames with bandpass filters. Several images of this flame are shown in Fig. 2.
In a reduced-gravity demonstration, an intensified CID camera imaged weakly luminous flames
spreading over thermally thin paper samples aboard the NASA LeaIjet [1]. The camera observed the
flames for ashless fIlter paper samples and laboratory wiper samples burning in quiescent, 21 and 18
percent oxygen environments. Most of the flames would have been difficult to detect using mm.
Attempts in I-g to use lower pressure and higher oxygen concentrations to emulate the reduced-gravity
combustion were not successful as the flames burned much brighter in 1-g, pointing out the dramatic
changes which occur upon greatly reducing buoyant convection. In another reduced-gravity use,
premixed hydrogen gas mixtures similar to those in Fig. 1 were imaged using an intensified CCD
camera aboard the NASA KC-135A [2]. Heretofore unseen and unpredicted flame structures and
behaviors were observed. The use of such a camera is now being planned for a proposed spaceflight experiment to further study these flames.
Another type of qualitative visualization which provides an indication of the location of the reaction
zone in a flame is reactive Mie scattering [3]. Laser light scattering centers are created in situ by
seeding the flame with a reactive compound, such as titanium tetrachloride. This material reacts with
water produced in the reaction zone to produce particles of titanium dioxide. The light scattered from
a laser light sheet by the particles can be imaged onto a detector. This technique was tried in I-g for
small methane and hydrogen gas jet diffusion flames having flow rates typical of those used in previous
microgravity studies. With an argon ion laser for the light sheet source, a narrow-band interference
mter at 488 nm, and a intensified cm camera. a significant amount of seed, -0.1 % of the total fuel
flow of 160 sccm, was required to obtain an acceptable signal. A change in flame color suggested an
effect on flame chemistry, although flame emission spectra were not quantified. Others have used this
technique for the visualization of transitional and turbulent flame structures. Those flames had much
higher total flow rates, and were only slightly perturbed by the production of the particles and hydrogen
chloride, as evidence by a 60 K depression in the stoichiometric temperatures [3]. The formation of
hydrogen chloride and subsequent problems with corrosion and venting will likely preclude the use of
this technique in the reduced-gravity facilities, although the use of titaniurn isopropoxide, which does
not produce HCI, is being considered. The use of a pulsed laser source for the light sheet is also
being explored, as a means to reduce the background flame emission by gating of the camera to match
the laser pulse length.
A major advancement in our capability to use non-optimum film or video images has been the
development of a system for the automatic and semiautomatic tracking of objects on film or video tape
using a color image processing and object tracking workstation [4]. The system components include
a 16-mm film projector, a lens system, a video camera, an S-VHS tapedeck, a frame grabber, and
computer-based storage and output devices. Tracking software has been developed to control the
system via a computer. The program controls the projector or tapedeck frame incrementation, grabs
a frame, image processes it, locates the feature of the object being tracked, and stores the coordinates
in a file. The image processing that can aid in the analysis include selective thresholding, gradient and
Laplacian filtering for edge detection, line histogram equalization to eliminate an uneven background,
and multi-frame averaging. Applications of the system include tracking the propagation of a flame
front over condensed-phase materials in microgravity and tracking the movement of a liquid-gas
interface from a nearly invisible meniscus. The system also can be used for objective color
characterization, such as that exhibited by the different color regions in a methane diffusion flame.

136

Infrared Emission Imaging

As mentioned aoove, many of the interesting flames found in microgravity studies are too weakly
luminous in the visible portion of the spectrum to be easily seen by coI:lventional film-based or video
cameras. Although flames are not in complete thennal equilibrium, a large portion of their radiant
energy is emitted as infrared radiation [5], which may be detected by infrared-sensitive devices.
Visibly-clear flame gases emit in an infrared spectrum of discrete bands from hot combustion products.
The mid-infrared emission occurs primarily from carbon dioxide at 2.8 and 4.3 microns and from water
at 1.8 and 2.7 microns. The intensities and shapes of the bands depend on the temperature and
composition of the combustion products. Measurements of temperature and concentration contours are
desirable for making a comparison between the observed flame and model calculations. Fuel-rich
mixtures also may contain soot, which emits broad-band radiation.
Until recently, the most common infrared cameras have been either single element or linear array
detectors. For best detectivity, the detector element is cooled to cryogenic temperatures. The detector
element may be combined with scanning optics to provide an expanded field-of-view and spatiallyresolved images. These cameras possess some disadvantages for combustion diagnostics. For example,
they contain moving parts in the scanning optics, which often produce a smeared image of a moving
object In addition, they are useful primarily for thermography of solids or liquids such as pools,
which have known or measured emissivities, and not as useful for the detection of gas phase emissions
because of the non-grey-body emissivities. They often give data output in temperature units rather than
the intensities needed for spectral data analysis.
Newly developed cameras such as those based on platinum silicide or indium antimonide possess many
qualities making them suitable for application to combustion diagnostics. They are sufficiently sensitive
in the near- and mid-infrared spectral region of I to 5 microns to detect the infrared emissions and are
true two-dimensional, solid-state, staring arrays. The output may be digital or a RS-170 video format
suitable for display on a monitor, digitizing by a frame grabber, or recording on videotape for
immediate playback or future analysis.
A low-resolution (128 x 128 pixels) platinum silicide camera has been used for our laboratory studies,
although cameras with higher pixel counts are available at a Significantly higher cost The camera has
a 100 mm focal length lens and an integration time of 1/30 sec. The bandpass fllter supplied with the
camera transmits wavelengths from 3 to 5 microns. An image obtained of a methane diffusion flame
is shown in Fig. 3. The flame height as visible to the eye is 5 em, but the camera is able to detect
the structure of the invisible hot gases rising several em above the flame.
Experimental WOIK to obtain spatially- and spectrally-resolved infrared images has occurred in two
areas. First, a monochromator having an infrared grating and detector has been acquired and will be
used to acquire an infrared emission spectrum of the flame in order to identify the wavelength regions
of interest Some bandpass filters have already been identified and will be used to obtain spectrallyflltered images. Second, a contract under the Phase I Small Business Innovative Research program has
resulted in the design and construction of an infrared imaging spectrometer. The spectrometer has
demonstrated the ability to resolve wavelengths from 3 to 5 microns with 15 nm resolution for a
propane/air torch flame.
The inversion of spatially- and spectrally-resolved infrared images to obtain species concentrations and
temperature profiles still remains a major effort It involves two parts: computerized image
reconstruction using tomographic algorithms, and the analysis of infrared emission spectra. The medical
industry has advanced the development of tomographic algorithms, which are being applied to
combustion data [6]. Two main classes of algorithms, Fourier transform and iterative, are used. The
analysis of infrared emission spectra is complicated by the fact that infrared emitting species also
absorb and the path of the light from the emitter to the detector must be considered. Computer codes,
such as the Aerodyne Radiation Code (ARC), have been developed to predict infrared spectra [7]. The

137

- - - - - - - --- - - - -

ARC calculates the infrared spectral signatures of rocket and aircraft exhaust plumes along a line-ofsight and includes molecular and particulate emission and absorption and chemiluminescent emission.
Such codes may be useful for micro gravity combustion. One of the goals of this research is to
investigate combining code such as this with tomographic algorithms for simple combusting systems
to obtain three-dimensional species and temperarure profiles.
The acquisition of images of known emissivity radiators, such as soot or thin ceramic fibers placed in
the flame, offers another possibility for obtaining temperature field measurements. The emission as
seen through two or more narrow-band filters is fit to a Planck distribution function to yield a ratio
temperature. Soot measurements have been studied extensively in the past and a body of literature
exists for reference. Point and line measurements using thin ceramic fibers have been reported using
fast response, near-infrared linear arrays [8}. Ceramic fiber grids are already being used successfully
in the drop tower for the qualitative assessment of the temperature distribution in gas-jet diffusion
flames and an individual fiber is being used as a tether and temperature indicator for an isolated,
com busting droplet.
Two-dimensional Temperature and Species Measurements Using a Solid-State Laser Source
Two-dimensional measurements of temperature and species concentrations in com busting systems are
of sperial value [9]. While various single-point (in time and space) methods have received considerable
attenti ·-:m, knowledge of the instantaneous overall flow field is preferable, especially in turbulent or
rapidly-evolving flow fields. The acquisition of many single data points does not always allow
reconstruction of the flow field and is restricted in micro gravity combustion studies by the limited
experimental time and/or laboratory availability. Both molecular Rayleigh scattering and planar laserinduced fluorescence (LIF) have been used as imaging techniques and to provide temperature and
species concenrrations measurements.
Rayleigh scattering is an elastic scattering process, whose signal depends on the incident laser
frequency, the molecular composition. and the number of scatterers. As the frequency of the light
detected from all scatterers is the same as that of the incident laser light, the technique lacks species
specificity. It suffers from interference from scattered laser light and Mie scattering from particles, but
has a relatively high signal strength compared to other laser-based diagnostics. Rayleigh scattering is
used for total density measurements, which can be related to temperature. LIP is used to detect an
atom or molecule detecting fluorescence from an excited electronic state following the absorption of
laser Light. Species specificity is provided by tuning the laser wavelength to an absorption transition
and selecting the observation wavelength, which may be the same as or shifted from the laser
wavelength. Key combustion intermediates found near the flame front in the parts per thousand to
parts per million, such as OH and CH, can be imaged using a planar light sheet. Quantitative
measurements can be made but are more difficult. LIF can be used to measure temperatures by
scanning the laser over several rotational transitions originating from different rotational levels having
temperature-dependent populations.
Both techniques benefit from a laser source with a short pulse length and high peak power. LIP
requires a tuneable laser source in the blue and ultraviolet. Rayleigh scattering measurements also
benefit from a tuneable source, since the wavelength may be tuned away from flame emissions. Most
currently-available laser sources used for laboratory-based. two-dimensional measurements are unsuitable
for low-gravity and space flight applications for a variety of operational and safety reasons. Dye lasers
use flammable solvents and toxic laser dyes which have only a finite lifetime. Excimer lasers use
corrosive gases such as hydrogen chloride or fluorine. which must also be changed regularly. These
lasers are also quite large and require much operator interaction.
The rapid development of pulsed, solid-state lasers based on titanium:sapphire offers a probable solution
to the problems outlined above. Laser action in the titanium:sapphire crystal was first reported in 1982

138

and the material was developed rapidly into a laboratory device [10]. Continuous-wave lasers have
been available from several vendors for several years and, recently, pulsed laser systems were
introduced. The titanium:sapphire laser is broadly tuneable from 700 to 1000 run. The production of
blue and ultraviolet light useful for combustion diagnostics from such a laser by frequency conversion
was demonstrated under a Phase I SBm contract monitored by NASA Lewis in 1990 [11].
ACquisition of a laser system capable of performing the diagnostic measurements described above is
in progress. Development and demonstration of these teclmiques using this laser source is an important
step towards bringing the level of diagnostics commonly available to microgravity combustion research
up to that available in other government, university, and industrial laboratories. The system will serve
as a prototype for the future and will place the development of micro gravity combustion diagnostics
at the forefront of this rapidly evolving technological area
References

1. Weiland, Karen 1., "Intensified Array Camera Imaging of Solid Surface Combustion Aboard the
NASA LeaJjet," AIAA Paper 92-0240, Jan. 1992; also NASA TM-105361.
2. Ronney, Paul D., "Studies of Premixed Laminar and Turbulent Flames at Microgravity,"
Proceedings of the Second International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, Cleveland, OH, Sept
15-17, 1992.
3. Chen, L.-D., Seaba. J. P., Roquemore, W. M., and Goss, L. P., "Buoyant Diffusion Flames."
Twenty-Second Symoosiwn (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh,
PA, 1988, pp. 677-684.
4. Klimek, Robert B., and Paulick, Michael J., "Color Image Processing and Object Tracking
Workstation." NASA TM-105561 , April 1992.
5. Gaydon. A. G., Flames. Their Structure. Radiation, and Temperature, 3rd ed .. Chapman and
Hall Ltd .. London. 1970, p. 215.
6. Santoro. R. J.. Semerjian. H. G .. Emmerman, P. J .. and Goulard. R., "Optical Tomography for
Flow Field Diagnostics," Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, Vol. 24, No.7, 1981, pp. 1139-1150.
7. Bernstein, Lawrence S., Wormhoudt, Joda c., and Conant, John A., "The Aerodyne Radiation
Code (ARC): Physical Assumptions and Mathematical Approximations," Aerodyne Research, Inc.,
ARI-RR-173, July 1979.
8. Vilimpoc, V., Goss, L. P., and Sarka, B., "Spatial temperature-profile measurements by the thinfilament-pyrometry technique," Optics Letters, Vol. 13, No.2, 1988, pp. 93-95.
9. Eckbretb, Alan C., Laser Diagnostics for Combustion, Temperature, and Species, Abacus Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1988, p. 362.
10. Moulton. P., "Spectroscopic and laser characteristics of Ti:~03'" Journal of the Optical
Society of America B, Vol. 3, No.1, 1985, pp. 125-132.
11. Rines, Glen A., and Moulton, Peter F., "Perfonnance of Gain-switched Ti:AI 20 3 UnstableResonator Lasers," presented at the OSA Topical Meeting on Advanced Solid State Lasers, Salt
Lake City, UT, March 5-7, 1990.

139

Figure]. Image of a 7% hydrogen in air
premixed Dame obtained using a visible to
near-i nfrared intensified array camera. The
image is at 0.2 sec following spark ignition in
a closed vessel.

1 em
a)

Figure 3. Image of a meti1ane gas jet
diffusion flan1e obtained using a platinum
silicide infrared array camera.

b)

1 em
Figure 2. Images of a Bunsen-type,
methane/air jet flame using an ultraviolet to
vis ible intensified array camera. The images
are obtained using interference filters centered
at a) 307 nm and b) 431 run and having a
bandpass width of 10 nm before the camera.

140

SELECTED MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
DeVon W. Griffin
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
Brook Park, Ohi o 44142

Paul S. Greenberg
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

Abstract
During FY 1989-1992, several diagnostic techniques for studying microgravity combustion have
moved from the laboratory to use in reduced-gravity facilities.
ntis paper discusses current
instrumentation for rainbow schlieren deflectometry and thermophoretic sampling of soot from gas jet
diffusion flames.
I. Rainbow Schlieren Deflectometry
Knowledge of the temperature field surrounding a combustion event is typically desired,
particularly in microgravity combustion studies. to assess the relative importance of buoyancy. While
temperature information may be obtained by intrusive devices such as thermocouples, this can significantly
perturb a reduced gravity flame. Therefore, optical methods are preferred, with interferometry the most
common approach. Interferometry is not without its drawbacks: temperature must be calculated from
refractive index data. which are not always available, optical elements. paths and path lengths must remain
fixed to a high degree of accuracy and visualization is difficult. One method of addressing the laner
problem is the use of a grey-scale schlieren system, but the eye is relatively insensitive to grey scale
differences. By replacing the Schlieren knife-edge with a color bar filter continuously varying in hue and
the typical monochromatic source by a white light, gradients in the refractive index field are displayed
as colors in the final image l . 2. Howes has shown3 -4 this technique is as sensitive as Mach-Zehnder
interferometry. Greenberg5 et al, utilize computer generation of filters and processing of the image to
obtain accuracies as good as those available with interferometry with the added benefit that requirements
on optical path length and element stability are greatly relaxed. While the final information is given in
terms of a refractive index. some knowledge of the combustion constituents and products allows
calculation of temperature profiles. Due to these advantages, we have pursued development of this
technology.
A schlieren optical system featuring off-axis parabolas (CAP's) is detailed in Figure 1. Due to
the nature of schlieren optics. the collimating/decollimating mirrors are larger than the field of regard.
As the field is increased. the cost of CAP's can rise dramatically. In addition, they present interesting
alignment challenges. While the aforementioned difficulties do not necessarily preclude the use of CAP's,
we have also pioneered the development of schlieren systems whose collimating mirrors are rotationally
symmetric but are tilted with respect to the optical axis passing through the test section. 6 The primary
mirrors may have either a spherical or parabolodial figure while catalog lenses correct the tilt-induced
aberrations. All lenses have a broadband antireflection coating due to the large number of air/glass
interfaces present
Final complications in the design of these systems relate to the spatial and spectral properties of
the fiber-optically coupled arc lamp that is used as a light source. With the sensitivity of a Rainbow
Schlieren device proportional to the focal length, our systems had a F number as high as 30; most fibers
emit light into an F-cone of roughly 2.5. Therefore, in one of our systems we place the fiber at the front
working distance of a well-corrected microscope objective, which converts the F number to approximately
20, conserving sufficient throughput for the system to function properly.
Quantitative color hue measurements require a rugged source that is spectrally stable with time
and has a uniform spectral intensity. We use a fiber-optically coupled arc lamp from fLC Technology.
In this device, a feedback-stabilized xenon arc placed at one focus of an ellipse is coupled into a
cylindrical sapphire waveguide at the other focus. The output end of the waveguide is polished to a radius

141

of curvature that produces a focus with a numerical aperture that matches most fibers, although the spot
produced is less than optimal. 'This lamp has the unwanted property of generating large amounts of
infrared radiation relative to the amount of visible light, which mandates attention be given to thermal
loading in the arc lamp housing. We have experienced fail ure of the fiber coupler on one of our
experimental rigs due to extreme heat loads.
Hue stability of the source is directly related to calibration requirements of the instrument. Since
we interpret hue shifts as a ray deviation from a refractive index gradient, a change in the color output
with time increases the amount of deviation required to observe a change in hue greater than the RMS
noise. Our source tends to exhibit long-term drift over a period of approximately four hours. Therefore,
any calibration older than roughly four hours exhibits somewhat decreased accuracy.
The concept of calibration ties together two issues: filter linearity in hue shift and filter fabrication.
In the optimal case, a change in position of a ray striking the fil ter relates linearly to a change in hue as
interpreted by the optical system. We represent color via utilization of the tri-stimulus values of red, green
and blue in a Hue Saturation Intensity (HSI) model. Throughout its range, the filter changes hue
continuously while remaining fully saturated. In fabricating a filter, we begin at one edge with red and
progress around the HSI cone, while remaining at a constant intensity and saturation level. Due to the
circular nature of the model, colors on the extreme ends of the filter are the same. When the hue has
completed a full cycle, saturation is gradually reduced until all three colors contribute an equal amount
producing a white band which appears on both ends of the filter. We use two methods to produce a filter.
The pattern may be photographed on 35 mm slide film from the display of a high-resolution computer
monitor. When taken as a single exposure, the background is black, which acts as a low-pass filter,
reducing resolution in the final image. A double exposure which creates a clear background eliminates
that problem. Alternatively, we can create digital set of values to describe the filter and from this set, a
com puter group at Lewis can produce slides.
The preceding discussion deals only with the fabrication of a filter in an ideal system. When such
a filter is placed in an actual device with an empty test section, the non-uniform film sensitivity combined
with uneven source and instrumental spectral transmission profiles result in a nonlinear variation of hue.
To correct this problem, the filter is placed in the actual system and a spot is scanned across the filter and
the hue recorded as a function of position. Our custom software then transforms the prescription for the
original filter to one that, while irregular in an absolute sense, creates a linear hue variation when used
in that specific system. An added complication is that the light source varies spectrally over the period
of a few hours and exhibits long-term drift. While this reduces the accuracy of the measurements, we
resolve gradients to roughly 0.2%. Given other uncertainties in the system, errors produced from source
drift are rarely the limiting factor. However, new filters can and should be fabricated at regular intervals
of lamp usage and when the lamp is replaced.
The final image of a rainbow schlieren system may be stored on video tape for later viewing and
also as a data source for programs which invert the data and produce a quantitative refractive index field.
We do not find the noise floor of the video system to be the limiting factor in the accuracy of the data.
Video tape decreases the spatial resolution available, but does not have a large effect on the signal-ta-noise
ratio. We also observe that the CCD camera and transmitter generate no measurable increase in the noise
floor.
In the use of a rainbow schlieren system, the size of the filter must be chosen to match the
expected ray deflections. As the magnitude of the refractive index gradient grows, the ray displacement
in the filter plane increases as well. Typically, we measure angular deviations on the order of two
milliradians, which determine the size of the filter. While some researchers request angular deviations as
large as eleven degrees, this is generally not a realistic number for a rainbow schlieren system for two
reasons. First, filter size, generation and mounting become difficult, if not impossible. Second, the
accuracy of the measurements can be severely degraded due to the presence of coma in the system. Rays
parallel to the optical axis suffer only from spherical aberration, while those propagating at some angle
with respect to the optic axis are generally affected by other aberrations, the magnitude of which varies

142

with the correction included in the optical design and fabrication tolerances. As coma is introduced,
accuracy suffers because coma may be thought of as a variation of focal length across the field Since .
knowledge of the focal length is required to calculate the refractive index distribution, the effects of coma
must be considered.
Finally, we use filters somewhat larger than that required by the predicted ray deviations. As rays
approach the edge of the filter, care must be taken to avoid interpreting the cutoff region as data. To
avoid this problem, we reject any data close to the edge.
II. Soot Diagnostics
Diagnostic efforts in the study of soot have been directed toward determining size distribution and
number density of soot within gas jet diffusion flames. To this end, we have demonstrated thennophoretic
sampling in both 0 and 1 G laboratories and have performed imaging light extinction in 1 G.
Thermophoretic sampling is well established as a useful method for studying sooe· ll in numerous
types of flames. This technique consists of inserting Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) grids in
the sooting region of a flame long enough to allow no more than ten percent of the surface to be covered
with soot. TEM Photos of the aggregates are then digitized and computer processed to determine primary
size distribution and aggregate dimensions. We implement this technique in a rig utilized in the 2.2
second drop tower at the NASA Lewis Research Center.
A simulated microgravity diffusion flame is illustrated in Figure 2 with a flow directed axially
along the burner. In the region above and to the side of the flame, two thin stainless steel probes are
shown, both of which suppon carbon-coated TEM grids. As implemented in our rig, the probes are
thermally isolated from the flame using a thin aluminum plate with a slit oriented along the axis of the
burner. with the probes attached to a pneumatically-activated suppon. The burner nozzle. probe support
structure, and accompanying electrical and gas delivery systems are located in the combustion chamber
at one end of the diagnostics rig (shown as Figure 3 in reference 12.) During a typical drop test,
electronics within the rig sense the release of the package into free-fall and immediately ignite the flame.
Approximately 1.4 seconds after ignition. the thermophoretic probes enter the soot shell and remain for
roughly 40 milliseconds. We have found this is long enough to collect a sufficient amount of soot
without violating the ten percent criterion.!o.ll
Following the drop. probes are removed from the rig and the grids photographed using the TEM.
These negatives are then backlit and the image digitized using commercial CCD arrays and frame-grabber
boards. A mix of in-house and commercial software allows us to measure primary size distribution as a
function of height. radial position in the flame and maximum aggregate length. In addition, an intensity
histogram, when correlated with the grey-scale background cutoff, gives the number of soot pixels in the
two-dimensional image. This in tum yields the total 2-D projected area of the 3-D aggregate through use
of an approximation. IO,11.13 We have found the size of primaries to be approximately a factor of two
larger in low gravity and the aggregates as much as twenty times longer. While the approximation is
thought to hold for aggregates of 2500 primaries or less. KoylU and Faeth ll use it for slightly larger
agglomerates. Due to the large size of our aggregates. we are also forced to extrapolate beyond the
assumed limit. To date. we have measured only one aggregate with more primaries than the largest of
Koylii and Faeth. We intend to examine the model13 of Meakin, et al. in greater detail to adapt it to our
larger aggregates.
A graph plotting the log of the estimated number of total particles versus the log of the
maximum aggregate length divided by the average particle diameter, similar to those from References 10
and 11 is shown in Figure 3. The soot is sampled 10 mm above and 8 mm radially from the nozzle of
an ethylene diffusion flame with a burner diameter of 2.29 mm and a flow rate of 1 cc/sec. While current
data is somewhat sparse as of this writing. fractal numbers are 1.46 ± 0.12 for normal gravity and 1.93 ±
0.16 for reduced gravity. indicating the possibility of different aggregation processes.
The foregoing analysis produces a reasonable indication of soot size distributions within the flame.
On the other hand, thermophoretic sampling does not yield information about the total quantity of soot

143

present in the flame. Therefore, the drop tower rig is also configured for imaging absorption, shown
schematically in Figure 4. Light from a He-Ne laser is spatially filtered, expanded and collimated,
following which it passes through the test section. As this light encounters the soot shell, it is absorbed
or scattered. By making grey scale measurements of the background before the test and comparing those
values to the reduced values seen while the flame is burning, quantitative data are obtained describing
the total amount of soot present. We implement this procedure in our laboratory and have begun the
process of incorporating it into the aforementioned rig used in the 2.2 second drop tower. The largest
problem to date is a shifting of the spatial filter and/or laser beam when the package is released into
freefall. A hardened spatial filter assembly is now in place and renewed tests should begin shortly.

IV, References
1. Settles, G.S., "Colour-coding schlieren techniques for the optical study of heat and fluid flow," Int. J.
Heat and Fluid Flow, 6, 3-1 5 (1985).
2. Vasil'ev, L.A., Schlieren Methods, (Israel Program for Scientific Translations, LTD) New York (1971).
3. Howes, W.L., "Rainbow Schlieren and its Applications," Applied Optics, 23, 2449-2460 (1984).
4. Howes, W.L., "Rainbow Schlieren vs. Mach-Zehnder Interferometer: A comparison," Applied Optics,
24, 816-822 (1985).
5. Greenberg, P.S., Klimek, R.B. and Buchele, D.R., "Quantitative Rainbow Schlieren Deflectometry," In
preparation for submission to ~pplied Optics.
6. Buchele, D.R. and Griffm, D.W. , "A Compact Color Schlieren Optical System," submitted to Applied
Optics.
7. Samson, R.1., Mulholland, G.W. and Gentry, 1.W., "Structural Analysis of Soot Agglomerates,"
Langmuir, 3, 272 (1987).
8. Dobbins, R.A. and Megaridis, C.M., "Morphology of Flame-Generated Soot as Determined by
Thermophoretic sampling," Langmuir, 3, 245 (1987).
9. Megaridis, C.M., "Thermophoretic Sampling and Soot Aerosol Dynamics of an Ethene Diffusion
Flame," Ph.D. Dissertation, Brown University (1987); also available as NBS report NBGCR-87-532.
10. Megaridis, C.M. and Dobbins, R.A., "Morphological Description of Hame-Generated Materials,"
Combustion Science and Technology, 71 , 95 (1990).
11. Kaylii, U. O. and Faeth, G.M., "Structure of Overfire Soot in Buoyant Turbulent Diffusion Flames
at Long Residence Times," Combustion and Flame, 89, 140 (1992).
12. Lekan, J. et al, "Constraints and Capabilities of Drop Tower and Aircraft Facilities," Proceedings of
the Second International Microgravity Combustion Worlcshop, 1992.
13. Meakin, P., Donn, B., and Mulholland, G.W., "Collisions between Point Masses and Fractal
Aggregates," Langmuir,S, 510 (1989).
144

Light Source

Source Aperture

.,------n..

Paraboloid Axis
_ _____ --.J{..... __ _

Condenser Lens ____

/

'\
Collimating Mirror

Edge

or
Rainbow
Filler

Camera

Figure 1
Typical Schlieren Optical System

Flow

Nozzle
----------------------~~

Thennophoreti
Probes
Figure 2
Therrnophoretic Soot Sampling Geometry

145

Ethylene 1.00 cc/... c
"'LeroG"
13.00

"

12.00
11.00
10.00

aJ

11.00
11.00
7.00

"

8.00

a.oo
4.0R.00

"

"

"
4.00

0.00
1n(Lm.u / dp)

11.00

Figure 3
Analysis of Ethylene Aggregates

Collimating

Lens

Microscope Objective

He-Ne

usa

Figure 4
Imaging Absorption Geometry

146

7.00

- _

. _-

- - - - --

- -

-

-

- - - - --

- - - - - - - -_ ._- _. .._ --

- ---- -

CO l\1MENTS
Question (Dr. Michael Winter, UTRC): What degree of temperature accuracy is available in the liquid- and
gas-phase measurement using the rainbow schlieren technique?
Answer: Accuracy in using the rainbow schlieren technique for either gas or liquid phase temperature
measurements depends on several quantities. First, the path length in which the refractive index changes
must be known to a high degree of accuracy. This is much easier to determine for liquids with fixed
boundaries or general axisymmetric distributions. In addition, the sensitivity of the system increases with the
focal length of the dccollimating lens. Finally, the quantity calculated is not temperature, but the refractive
index distribution. Therefore, knowledge of the constituent substances and the dependence of their index on
temperature is required before an accurate determination of the temperature can be made.
The foregoing begs the initial question (i.e., what temperature accuracies are available). We have measured
liquid-phase temperatures with a full-field difference of 1 K and a resolution within that field of 0.2 K. While
we have reconstructed refractive index profiles for gas-phase distributio ns, we have not yet performed
te mperature calculations, but expect to do roughly an order of magnitude worse.
Question (A. Gomez, Yale Uni\'ersity): Thermophoretic sampling used to capture aggregates as large as 12
mm may suffer from some biasing with respect to particle size, since you operate in the continuous regimes
(Kn approximately 10-2 to 10- 1). On Ihe other hand in the free-molecular regime (Kn greater than 1) , which
is typical of n-gravity names, there is no size-dependent effect on sampling. Could you comment on this
complication?
Answer: Thermoshoretic sampling of soot is a well-established technique for the study of soot produced in
varying names. 1- These studies were performed under normal gravity conditions. This question is directed
specifica lly toward sample biasing due to operation in the continuum regime for large aggregates present in
reduced gravity. A recent paper by Rosner, Mackowski and G arcia- Ybarra-l has shown that even in this
extreme, the maximum sa mpling bias will be at most approximately 20 percent. Therefore, the inlluence on
population samples, morphologies or light scattering properties should be small. Since the fractal number is
calculated using the slope of the best-fit line when plotting number vs. normalized size. this qU:llltily should
be imperceptibly affected.
REFERENCES:

1.

Dobbins. R.A.and Megariuis. CM. "Morphology of Fbme-Generated Soot as Determined by
Thermophoretic Sampling." Langmuir. 3, 254-259 (1987).

2.

Megaridis, CM. and Dobhins, R.A , "l\forphological Dcscription of Flame-Gencrated Materials,"
Combustion Science and Technology, 71, 95-109 (1990).

3.

Koylu , U.o., and Faeth. G.M ., "Structure of Overfire Soot in Buoyant Turbulent Diffusion Flames at
Long Residence Times," Combustion and Flame, 89, 140-156 (1992) .

.l,

Rosner, D .E., Mackowski, D.W., and Garcia- Ybarra, P., "Size- and Structure-Insensitivity of
Thermophoretie Transport of Aggregated Soot Particles in Gases," Combustion Science and
Technology, 80, 87-101 (1991).

147

- -

LASER DIAGNOSTICS FOR MICROGRAVITY DROPLET STUDIES
Michael Wi nter
United Technologies Research Center
East Hartford , Connecticut 06108

ABSTRACT
Rapid advances have recently been made in numerical simulation of droplet combustion under microgravity
conditions, while experimental capabilities remain relatively primitive. Calculations can now provide detailed infonnation
on mass and energy transpon, complex gas-phase chemistry, multi-component molecular diffusion, surface evaporation and
heterogeneous reaction, which provides a clearer picture of both quasi-steady as well as dynamic behavior of droplet
combustion. l Experiments concerning these phenomena typically result in pictures of the burning droplets, and the data
therefrom describe droplet surface regression along with flame and soot shell position. With much more precise, detailed.
experimental diagnostics, significant gains could be made on the dynamics and flame structural changes which occur during
droplet combustion. Since microgravity experiments become increasingly more expensive as they progress from drop
towers and flights to spaceborne experiments, there is a great need to maximize the information content from these
experiments. Sophisticated measurements using laser diagnostics on individual droplets and combustion phenomena are
now possible. These include measuring flow patterns and temperature fields within droplets,2 vaporization rates and
vaporization enhancement) radical species profLling in flames4 and gas-phase flow-tagging velocimetry.5 Although these
measurements are sophisticated, they have undergone maturation to the degree where with some development, they are
applicable to studies of microgravity droplet combustion. This program begining in September of 1992, will include a
series of measurements in the NASA Learjet, KC-135 and Drop Tower facilities for investigating the range of applicability
of these diagnostics while generating and providing fundamental data to ongoing NASA research programs in this area.
This program is being conducted in collaboration with other microgravity investigators and is aimed toward supplementing
their experimental efforts.

INTRODUCTION
Measurement Needs
Droplet Internal Flow
While modeling efforts of droplet combustion under microgravity conditions have been expanded to include
transport and chemistry, 1 experiments are providing data on droplet surface regression rates along with fiame.a.-.J soot shell
position. Even these limited data disagree with theory ,6 possibly as the result of gas-phase convection around the droplet
and liquid-phase convection within it. The internal flows may largely be residual from the droplet deployment process in
which a droplet is suspended on a hypodermic needle which is rapidly retracted. To understand the results of the experiment,
it is necessary to characterize these droplet flow patterns and determine if they can be dissipated over some time delay period.

Gas-Phase Flow
Gas-phase motion over the surface of a droplet can have a profound impact on the droplet burning rate. Droplet
deployment can leave droplets with a residual drift on the order of 1-2 mm/sec and as high as 10 mm/sec. Relative gasphase motion of just a few mm/sec can result in a significant change in the droplet burning rate. 6 The effect of spark:
ignition can be a dramatic effect; it introduces a perturbation in the gas-phase flow resulting in a second source of residual
gas/droplet motion. Techniques for anchoring a droplet in place using either fiber suspension or electrodynamic levitation
certainly warrant investigation. These techniques alone, however, may not be adequate without assessing the gas-phase
flow, possibly using a flow tagging or velocimetry imaging approach.

149

- - -..

---

Preceding Page Blank

Flame Front Position
Knowing the position of the reaction front is important for anchoring computer models. Currently, an
approximation of this position is obtained from back illumination images and natural light imaging on a second camera:
lhese characteristics are not likely to be able to be related directly to predicted model parameters in a quantitative fashioR.
These can be difficult to interpret, since they are a line of sight meas\D'ement on a spherical body. Planar laser-induced
fluorescence of OH could at least provide representative flame front positions4-even if only performed qualitatively. On the
lean side of the flame. OH would prove reasonable as a flame front marker. Performed in a time resolved manner, these
measurements could provide information on combustion unsteadiness regarding not only flame position relative to the
droplet but also the structure of the flame.

Liquid-Phase Thermometry
Droplet combustion can be characterized as a generic gas phase diffusion flame with curvat\D'e but no flame stretch.
The flame strucrure is. however, to some degree rare limited by evaporation: the transfer of heat into the droplet is therefore
an important influence on the burning rate. Measuring the liquid phase temperature distribution could further the
understanding of the flame behavior. particularly for multi-component droplet combustion.
Diagpostic

Capabilities

Optical flow diagnostics offer several advantages over physical probes because they permit multi-point
measurements non-intrusively. Non-intrusive measurements are of particular importance for droplet combustion and
lranspon in microgravity environments where physical contact would introduce perturbations. The resolution of these
diagnostics can also isolate transpon to length-scales much smaller than the droplet diameter. These techniques can be
configured to instantaneously map an entire flow field in two and three dimensions, providing either qualitative or
quantitative information on lhe distribution of a desired scalar.

Internal Circulation and Quenched Fluorescence
The capability for measuring flow patterns within individual droplets 7 using oxygen quenching of laser-induced
fluorescence has been demonstrated. Decane doped with naphthalene was used for the initial experiments. Droplets from a
droplet-on-demand generator fall a shon distance into a chamber filled with nilI'Ogen and a variable amount of oxygen. A
thin sheet of ultra-violet light from the fourth harmonic of a Nd:YAG laser at 266 nm illuminates single droplets. A
magnified image of the naphthalene fluorescence is recorded digita1ly using a two-dimensional vidicon detector interfaced to
a laboratory computer. Since oxygen is a SlI'Ong fluorescence quencher, any liquid volume element which has been exposed
to it by surface contact or diffusion will suffer a reduction in fluorescence intensity. Convection from the surface due to
internal circulation and diffusion cause oxygenated image regions to appear darker. Oxygen-free experiments provide a
baseline case for comparison. These data are shown in Fig. 1. This diagnostic can be used to describe flow patterns within
droplets. and for determination of relaxation times for the motion to dissipate.

Exciplex Thermometry
Temperarure measurements have been performed within droplets as a function of ambient temperature using two
color detection. 2 The temperature measurement technique used is exciplex fluorescence thermometry, which exploits the
fluorescence at two different wavelengths resulting from the reaction of an excited dopant molecule to form an ~ted-state
com~ or exciplex. 8 The technique was used to measure the temperature along a meridian plane of the droplets. An
exciplex system is formed using naphthaleneffMPD in decane. At higher temperarures, the system monotonically shifts to
increase monomer selective concentration and monomer fluorescence (blUe/violet) dominates, hence, the ratio of monomer
fluorescence over exciplex fluorescence (green) and the intensity ratio can yield the temperat\D'e. The resulting fluorescence
from the droplet is imaged in two dimensions at both wavelength regions. The pixel-to-pixel ratio of these two images can
be used, after calibration, to obtain the temperature. This measurement would be especially important for com busting
multi-component droplets but due to lhe sensitivity to oxygen quenching has been used to date in non com busting systems.
As will be described below, microgravity droplet combustion may present an ideal opportunity for implementation of this
approach since the symmetric envelope flame may preclude oxygen from contacting the droplet fluid.

Levitation and Suspension of Droplets
The aforementioned diagnostic techniques rely on a droplet occupying a known position to allow the laser beam to
"slice" through a central plane precisely . The droplet surface acts lilce a lens, bending the incident rays toward the center of
the droplet The light will appear to not fill the circumference (top and bottom) of the droplet if the illumination sheet is
not incident on a great circle. slicing exactly through the center of the droplet In typical microgravity experiments. slight
drifts in droplet position are unavoidable. These drifts may be due to either droplet relative motion within the test chamber,

150

~

or, g-jitter which is typical of microgravity environments on aircrafL These drifts, however, can be compensated for by
either an electrodynamic levitator or an extremely small fiber to tether the droplet
Producing and supporting a droplet on a thin fiber or fllament can be achieved repeatedly with automated
deployment A droplet-on-demand generator can produce a single droplet which is brought into contact with the fiber
filament. When the filament has a slight material bead or buildup at some position along its length, the droplet becomes
anchored and supported at that position. This arrangement is shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of the fiber and roundness of
the bead require careful attention relative to the droplet diameter so as not to change the surface contour of the droplet at the
wetting surface of the fiber. With careful consideration, these criteria are easily mel Droplets supported in this manner can
be used for experimentation even in the presence of g-jitter. It should be noted that while the g-jitter effects the data quality,
it will not effect the success of the experiments.

Flame Front and Gas-Phase Velocimetry
An additional research requirement would be detailing the gas-phase flow field and position of the flame front
This can be achieved using Planar Laser-Induced Auorescence (PLIF) of OH4 which is typically performed by tuning a laser
to the OH molecular absorption and recording the emitted radiation with a two-dimensional detector. Laser sources and
detection systems capable of operating under the power and shock environments typical of drop tower conditions may be
available, however, some development is likely to be required. An alternative approach would be to provide laser-induced
fluorescence from a diagnostic seed included in the liquid-phase fuel which would be consumed at the flame front This, in
principle, would be easier. and lower risk since the diagnostic capabilities and instrumentation already exisL The mam
advantage to this approach would be that the wavelength of the molecular absorption involved can be chosen to coincide
with convenient laser wavelengths than lasers can be configured to access OH. The details of this approach will be given
under the project description.

Gas-phase flow tagging is capable of defming the flow field around the droplet and can be performed in a number of
different ways. For post-combustion gas conditions. photodissociating water vapor in known spatial locations and
subsequently recording the PLIF of OH yields gas phase velocities. 5 This approach is probably beyond the scope of
micro gravity applications due to its complexity and instrumentation requirements. An alternative approach would be to use
laser-induced phosphorescence. by writing lines in a pre-seeded flow and subsequent imaging the convection of triplet-state
excited molecules. In this way, gas-phase velocities and flame positions could be measured.
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) holds the potential for recording two-components of velocity in a twodimensional plane. Conventional techniques like Laser Doppler Velocimetry would not be appropriate because it is a point
technique and would not provide information related to the global flow field. PIV uses lasers to illuminate a seeded fluid
with two shon. properly-timed pulses. In this way. each particle in a sheet of laser light can be illuminated and imaged
twice in a frame of an imaging device such as a CCD camera. With this information. spatially resolved maps of two
components of velocity can be determined. The proper selection of image magnification. pulse timing. particle size and
seed rate. allow a two-dimensional velocity field to be acquired instantaneously. Video acquisition systems and computer
software are used to process the images and manipulate them to produce the vector field.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Program Plan
The objective of this program is to perform a series of measurements to investigate the range of applicability of
advanced laser diagnostics to microgravity applications while generating as much fundamental data to ongoing NASA
microgravity research programs as possible. Through consultation with NASA personnel. and other researchers in the field
of microgravity droplet transpon and combustion. priorities will be established with respect to measurement parameters.
The measurement parameters currently under consideration are:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

droplet internal flow
relative gas-phase flow around droplets
flame front position
liquid-phase tbermometery.

An integrated diagnostic unit, capable of performing these measurements will be assembled. All of the major
components such as lasers. detectors and data systems are currently available and allocated to this effon. A self-contained
miniature nitrogen-pumped dye laser system and two-dimensional intensified diode-array imaging system will form the c<X'e
of the unit

151

The testing program will proceed with ever more challenging environments proceeding from the laboratory, to
flight based tests. and fmally. to drop tower facilities. The diagnostic approaches and instrumentation would be verified in a
laboratory setting. Experiments with the intent of reducing the risks associated with high impact and droplet drift would be
conducted on either the Learjet or KC-135 Aircraft with fiber suspended droplets. Measurements will be performed on
droplet internal flow patterns and the applicability of liquid phase thermometry in a burning droplet. Investigations will be
made into performing PLIF measurements of OH or a diagnostic seed material to describe flame front position. Gas-phase
flow dynamics will be determined by velocity measurements using particle image velocimetry.

Risk Reduction - Flight Experiments
Initial experiments are designed to reduce the risks associated with high impact and droplet drift Experiments of
droplet combustion under microgravity conditions are best if carried out in either the NASA LeRC 22-Second Drop Tower,
or the S.18-Second Zero-Gravity Facility, to provide a "clean" set of experimental conditions. Two aspects of these
facilities and the environment they provide present the greatest challenges to laser diagnostic implementation. Frrst. the
impact at the bottom of the tower can range from 60 -70 g's. Designing advanced instrumentation to sustain these impacts
is quite difficult. A risk reduction step is to perform a test sequence aboard the NASA Aircraft Microgravity Facilities.
Althougb the aircraft do not provide as "clean" a microgravity environment, (-10- 2 g), the diagnostic could be developed
while still providing quality data. These experiments would be followed by measurements in the LeRC 2.2-Second Drop
Tower.

I solate Droplet Motion
The second challenge to diagnostic implementation is the droplet drift present in all previous microgravity droplet
experiments. As described above, droplet deployment is always accompanied by some initial velocity which is impaned on
the droplet The relative motion of the droplet to the ambient gas can result in significant change in the burning behavior.
Furthennore. this motion complicates the diagnostics. To alleviate these problems the experiments can be performed on
droplets supported on a thin fiber, or supported in an electrodynamic trap. Fiber support is relatively simple, however.
detailed measurements of the effect of the fiber boundary on droplet internal flow patterns would still need to be understood.
The operation of electrodynamic traps becomes considerably simplified at low gravity due to the reduced forces on the
droplet
An automated deployment system will be coupled to thin filament suspension. A droplet-on-demand generator will
produce a single droplet which is brought into contaCt with the fiber filament The filament will have a slight material bead
or buildup at some position along its length so that the droplet becomes anchored and supponed at that position as is
shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of the fiber and roundness of the bead will receive careful attention relative to the droplet
diameter so as not to change the surface contour of the droplet at the wetting surface of the fiber. Droplets supported in this
manner will be used for experimentation even in the presence of g-jitter. It should be noted that even though the g-jitter
effects the quality of the data relative to combustion due to the gas-phase fluctuations. it will not effect the success of the
experiments.

Internal Flow Patterns
Initial measurements are directed toward describing the internal flow patterns of droplets in a non-combusting
environmenL The convection of oxygen dissolved into the surface fluid of an isothermal. non-burning droplet will be
detected by the quenching of 1aser-induced fluorescence. TIle fluorescence images will be recorded in two dimensions from a
1aser sheet., provided by a compact nitrogen laser, which slices through the interior of the droplet This measurement can be
perfonned in a time-phased manner with the introduction of a time delay to evaluate temporal evolution. These experiments
could potentially answer questions relating deviations between current experiments and theory.

Liquid-Phase Thermometry
An extension of the flow measurement techniques will provide liquid-phase thermometry using the same apparatus.
Laser-induced exciplex thermometry can be employed in a burning droplet, if it could be shown that no oxygen permeated
into the measurement regions. This would be expected in microgravity conditions where a symmetric envelope flame
swrounds the droplet and consumes oxygen prior to dissolution in the liquid-phase. This assumption is easily verified by
repeating the flow pattern measurements on burning droplets. Liquid-phase thermometry would qualitatively confirm
modeling assumptions while providing quantitative temperature data.

Flame Front Measurements

Development of the UTRe diagnostic system will be directed toward PLIF of OH. Potentially minor
modifications to the nitrogen 1aser system may allow it to operate on excimer gases such as XeCI, thus providing a means
of directly exciting the OH molecule. Alteratively. arc lamp illumination could be used. This would provide image data on

152

- - - -- -- - - - - --

II

- --

._

-

--

the position of the flame front around a burning droplet A second alternative approach would be to perform lasec-induced
fluoresceoce from a diagnostic seed included in the liquid-phase fuel which would be consumed at the flame front This. in
principle. would be easier and the diagnostic capabilities and instrumentation already exisL The main advantage to this
approach would be that the molecular absorption wavelength can be chosen to coincide with more-easily-accessed laser
wavelengths than those of OH. Several diagnostic materials are available with readily available absorptions. high
fluorescence yields. and flammability limits similar to typical fuels. i.e.• biacetyl in methanol. For these studies. the
niuogen Jasec will be used in conjunction with the dye Jasec bIDed to the appropriate wavelength.

Gas-Phase Flow
Particle Image Velocimetry (plY) holds the potential for recording two-components of velocity in a twodimensional plane. PIV will be performed using two pulses from the nitrogen laser to illuminate the gas surrounding the
droplet after it is seeded with aerosol particles. In this way. each particle in a sheet of laser light can be illuminated and
imaged twice in a frame of the imaging system. With this information. two components of the velocity vector will be
determined. The proper combination of image magnification, pulse timing, particle size and seed rate. provide
instantaneous two-dimensional velocity fields. Computer software to process these images and manipulate them to produce
the vecror field is currently in use at UTRC.

Conclusions
This research program provides measurements investigating the range of applicability of these advanced diagnostics
while generating fundamental information relevant to ongoing NASA programs in microgravity droplet combustion. Using
a progressive approach, advanced laser diagnostics will be transported from laboratory, to flight experiments. and ultimately
to drop tower facilities. In this way, these diagnostics can be developed. while providing fundamental data on droplet
transport and combustion at an early date. The experiments and measurement parameters suggested here, reflect the needs of
other researchers in this area. Dissemination of the results of this program throughout the community will effect their
research directly. At the cooclusion of this program, the technology demonstrated herein will be applicable to future ground
based research, as well as space based operation aboard future Shuttle. Space Lab or Space Station Freedom laboratory
modules. The facility and techniques demonstra1ed would serve as a stepping stone for future programs. Development and
demonstration of this technology at this time, is a prerequisite for these far reaching goals.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8

Cho, S. Y., Yetter, R. A. and Dryer, F. L.; A Computer Model for One-Dimensional Mass and Energy Transport
in and Around Chemically Reacting Particles, Including Complex Gas-Phase Chemistry, Multicomponent
Molecular Diffusion. Surface Evaporation and Heterogeneous Reaction, Journal of Computational Physics, 1991.
Winter. M.; Temperature Measurements Inside A Falling Droplet. ILASS , May 1990.
Anderson, T. J. and Winter, M.; Measurement of The Effect of Acoustic Disturbances on Droplet Vaporization
Rates. AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno Nevada. 1992.
Hanson, R. K.; Combustion Diagnostics: Planar Imaging Techniques. Twenty-First Symposium (International)
on Combustion, p. 1677, 1986.
Boedeker. L. R.: Velocity Measurement By H20 Photolysis and Laser-Induced Auorescence of OH, Optics Letters,
Vol. 14 p.473. 1989.
Williams. F. A.,Dryer, F. L.; Preliminary Science Requirements Document For The Droplet Combustion
ApparatuS, NASA LeRC, 1991
Winter, M. and Melton. L. A.;Measurentent of Internal Circulation in Droplets Using Laser-Induced Auorescence.
Applied Optics. Vol. 29, No. 31, p. 4574, 1990.
Murray, A. M., and Melton, L. A.; Auorescent Methods for Detennination of Temperature in Fuel Sprays, AppL
Optics, Vol. 24, p. 2783. 1985.

153

Oxygen

Ambien~

Nitrogen Ambient

Oxygen/Nitrogen

Fig. 1 Measurement of internal circulation from within
droplets using fluorescence quenching.
SE:.'€ Cblor Plate C-7a

Fig. 2 Surface fluorescence quenching
from a droplet supported on a fiber.

92e Cblor Plate C-7b
154

COMMENTS
Question (A. Gomez, Yale University): In an electrodynamic balance, typically. a DC field is used to
counterbalance gravity and AC field is used to provide lateral stability. III the microgravity experiments the
g-field is highly variable. Have you thought about a feasible feedback system to accurately change your DC
voltage over several orders of magnitude?
Answer: The e lectrodynamic balance can be operated with a DC field, an AC field , or a superposition of
both. In one-g, the gravitational influence is typically offset with the DC field, and the AC fidd is applied to
provide lateral stability. The levitator can, however, be operated stably with just the AC field even at one-g,
eliminating the need to activcly adjust the DC voltage for changes in gravitational field or droplet mass.
Since the AC field provides a force towards equilibrium corresponding to an opposite velocity of the droplet,
strong AC fields tend to overdrive the droplets resulting in oscillations. The AC frequency must be tuned for
stability, corresponding to a reaction time-constant relating droplet inertia and drag. Our experience has
shown that for droplets in the 500 micron diameter range at atmospheric conditions frequencies of the order
of 400 Hz are most appropriate.
Question (C.T. Avedisian. Co rnell l ' niversity): How tlo you plan to "calibrate" your approach for Ilame
diameter measurcment based on CH identification? For example, do you plan to cOl1lpare flamc diameter
measured from photographs with your lascr based flame diamct e r?
Answer: In hydrocarbon flames. CH radicallascr-induced fluorescence is accepted in the literature as the
best indicator of most intense chemical reactions. While photographic recording of broadband flame
luminosity is often used for indicating fl a mc positions, these measurements suffer from bot h spatial ambiguity
associated with line-of-sight obseryation, and assumptions related to non-equilibriul1l chemistry and excitedstate radical-species formation. Comparisons will be attempted between luminosity observations and the
laser-induced fluorescence flame front indicator to be used in this study, to establish correspontlcnce between
the approaches.

155

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

- -

-

-

-

-

~-

SESSION D - PREMIXED FLAMES

(Chair, Mitchell Smooke)

I'

Preceding Page Blank

'---_.

--

-_..

-

J

I

I
STUDIES OF PREMIXED LAMINAR AND TURBULENT FLAMES
AT MICROGRAVITY
Paul D. Ronney
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton , New Jersey 08544

Introduction
The work of the Principal Investiga t o r (PI) has encompassed four topics
related to the experi ment al a n d theo r e ti c al study of combustion limits in
premixed flames at microgr a v ity, as discu s sed in the following sections. These
topics include:
Radiation effects on p r e mixed gas flames
Flame structure and s t a bi lit y at low Lewis number
Flame propagation a nd extinction in cylindrical tubes
Experimental s imu l a t i on of combustion processes using autocatalytic
chemical reactions
Radiation effects on premixed g a s f lame s
Our previous wor k ha s d emon s tr a t ed the importance of gas radiation in the
propagation and exting uis hme nt of pre mixed gas flames [1, 2].
However, gas
radiation is a weak effect and is only a significant influence for very slowly
burning flames. These flames can only be observed at ~g due to buoyancy effects
at one-g. Furthermore, it is n o t c lea r whether radiation is a fundamental limit
because in very large s yst e ms (say, t e ns of meters) emitted radiation could be
reabsorbed within the gas a nd thu s not lost from the system.
In this case the
propagation rate could actually incre ase because radiation would augment the
usual transport by conduction of heat from the flame front to the unburned gas
(3) .

To test these hypotheses, we have examined radiation effects by studying
flames at ~g in gas mixtures to which small quantities of inert, radiant
particles have been added.
Solid particles emit and absorb radiation across a
broad spectrum, unlike gas molecules which are active only in narrow spectral
bands. Thus, appreciably more radiation and absorption can be expected in
particle-laden gases. Our preliminary experiments [4] have shown that at small
particle loadings, burning rat e s are reduced (Fig. 1), peak pressures in
constant-volume combustion are lower (Fig. 1) and thermal decay rates in the
burned gases are increased (Fig. 2).
This indicates that the significance of
radiative loss is enhanced by the addition of particles to the gas.
With
sufficient seeding, the burning rates are practically the same as those found in
particle-free mixtures (Fig. 1), the peak pressures are comparable (Fig. 1) and
the thermal decay rate is smaller than particle-free mixtures (Fig. 2). All of
these observations are consistent with the hypothesis that at sufficiently high
particle loadings, radiation is reabsorbed within the combustible medium, and
thus may not constitute a fundamental limit in very large systems. In essence,
the presence of particles has made the system "larger" in that the ratio of the
system size to mean absorption length of radiation is increased.
Future work will focus on methods of quantifying the particle density,
mixture optical thickness, and obtaining results for a variety of mixtures and
particle loadings to compare with theory and to determine if flammability limits
can be entirely suppressed when radiation losses are eliminated.

159

Preceding Page Blank

Flame s t ructure and stability at low Lewis number
We have found in previous work that the tendency of flames i n mixtures with
l ow Lewis numbers, e.g. hydrogen-air, to break up into cells affects the nearl imit b ehavior dramatically [5J. I n some cases flame propagati o n c e ases entirely
without flame e x tinction o ccurring. In these cases stable, sta t i o nary spherical
f lames ( "flame balls") seem to e x ist .
Stationary spher i cal f lames h ave been
p redicted previo us l y but are predi cted to b e un stable. Furthe r wor k h as s h owed
that such p h enomena seem to occur in al l mi xtures with suff ic ie nt ly low Le wis
n umbe r a nd near f lammabil i ty limi t s, independent of the c h emi ca l me chan ism [6 J .
Exper ime n ts on the KC-135A aircra f t sho wed that t hese structu r es are st ab l e fo r
at l east the 2 0 seconds o f low-g avail a ble [6J. By compar i s on with analytical
mode ls [7, 8) , it h as been concluded th at ra diation from the combu s tion produc t s,
al o ng wi t h di f f usive-thermal ef f ects in low-Le mixtures, i s prob ably the
st ab ilization me c h anism whi ch a l l o ws flame b al ls to e x ist a t ~g .
At o ne-g, the s e f lames are enti r e ly b u oy a n c y - domi nated . Consequent ly , the
fl a mmability limi t s are mu ch lea ne r at ~g than one-g, for example 3.35% vs. 4 . 0%
H2 for H2-a ir mixture s [6 J.
Th i s re su l t is in very go od agreement wi t h a
computationa l study of f l ame ba lls e mplo ying deta iled chemistry and transport
mod els [9J in whi c h a l i mit of 3.5% H2 was p redict e d.
The g-jitter in the KC-13 5A experiment s ('" O. 02g) caused substantial motion
of flame balls.
The d r ift v elocity was found (6J to be proportional to g l/2,
consistent with bubble t h eory . This drift al s o led to the formation of two t ype s
of quasi-cyl indrical flame structures which we have termed " flame strings" (Fig.
3) [6J.
These strings are unstable, in that they eventually break into flame
balls, but live much longer than would be expected based on thermal diff u sion
time scales alone.
Consequently, they are almost certainly being suppo r ted by
chemical reaction.
The ir existence is curious, be c ause no steady solution is
possible for cylindrical flames (unlike spherical flames).
It seems then that
they would evolve radi a l l y given sufficient time, but the axial instability which
leads to their breakup manifests itse l f befo r e radia l evolution occurs. Recent
theory [lOJ supports this suggestion .
Another type of flame string, not directly related to that discussed above,
has been observed in H2 - 0 2-SF 6 and CH.-0 2 -SF 6 mixtures , particularly at high
pressures (6J. These strings are different in that they are uncorrelated with
buoyancy effects and see m to form much faster than any conventional diffusional
or hydrodynamic timescale would allow. We conjecture that these are a result of
reabsorption of emitted radiation, which is most likely to occur in SF 6-diluted
mixtures and at high pressures because the Planck mean absorption length (~) is
much shor ter in SF6 than CO 2 or H2 0 and is inversely proportional to pressure; at
300K and 2 atm, Lp for SF 6 is only 0.13 cm!.
A flight experiment is under development: to determine if the apparent
st ability of flame balls can be confirmed in experiments where both the duration
of ~g is long (unlike drop-tower experiments) and the quality is significantly
better th an that in aircraft tests.
Also, the presence or absence of flame
strings will be studied to determine the role buoyancy plays in their formation .
In addition to addressing development issues in support of the development of
flight hardware, future work will stress the role of reabsorption of emitted
radiation on these flame structures using high - pressure tests and particle-laden
mixtures. It is possible that the presence of particles will influence transport
of thermal energy (see above) but should not influence mass transport, leading
to a radiation-influenced Lewis number which may be higher than the particle - free
value, thereby inhibiting the cellular ins t a bility .
Flame propagation and extinction in cylindr i cal tube s
The standard apparatus for meas u ring flammabilit y limits of premixed ga s e s
at earth gravity is the St a n dard Fl a mmability Limit Tube, or SFLT.
Thi s is a
tube 5 cm diamete r a n d 200 c m long which is fi lled with combustible g as a n d
ignited at one end .
The mixtu re is d e fin ed to b e flamma ble if it suppo rts
propagation throug h out t he tube. Despi te ma ny year s of st u dy, the mechan isms of
flame extinction in t he SF LT is not well underst ood. The r e l ative import a nce o f

160

buoyancy, flame st retch, heat loss to the tube wall, radiation loss, etc. have
not b e en asses s ed.
Mo s t the o rie s of f l ammabi l ity limi ts p redict the flame propagation rate at
the limit (Sb.lim) ' Hence , measurement o f S b.l1m enables comparison with theories.
We have conducted s uch e xperiments at earth gravity in tubes of varying diameter,
at va r ying pre s sures and wi th mix tures h a v ing varying fuels, inerts, and Lewis
numbe r s (Le).
We have f ound th a t t h e c haracteristics of the limits can be
described in t e rms o f t he effect o f t h e Gr ashof number Gr
gdJ /a2 on the limit
Peclet number Pe
Sb. u",d/ a, where g is g r a vity, d the tube diameter and a the
thermal diffusivity a t r oom temperature . Figures 4 and 5 show the results for
upward and downwa rd propaga t ion, r especti vely.
In each case, at low Gr the
results are consist ent wi th theoretical p redictions [11] for flame extinguishment
by conduction loss t o the tube walls, n amel y Pe = constant = 40. At higher Gr,
results are consist e nt wit h buoyanc y -ind uced extinction mechanisms, in the upward
propag ating case Pe - Gr l/2 [ 1 2] and in the downward case Pe - Grl/3.
Because of
the difference in e xtinction mechanisms , we have found that the flammability
limit can actually be wider f o r do wnward propagation than upward propagation
(though for most commonly -studi ed va lue s of Gr and Le, this is not the case) .
In the upward case , at Gr > 2. 0 x 10· (corresponding to a pipe-flow
Reynolds number of 20 00 ) tu r b ulent fl ow is exhibited; the flame behavior can be
either flamelet-like or d is t rib u t e d - like depending on Gr and Le.
Downward
turbulent propagation at the l imi t is a lso possible, but would require Gr = 40
x 10 9 according to our sca l i n g analysis , and is beyond the limits of our
apparatus.
Our scaling analyse s indicat e tha t radiation losses cannot be significant
at earth gravity for any expe rimentally realizable conditions; either conduction
losses or buoyancy effects will dominate .
Of course, radiation can be the
dominant extinction mecha n i s m i n large tubes at ~g. We are initiating a study
of this extinction proces s for c omparison to our previous results in a constantvolume chamber with cent r al i g nition (which produces spherically expanding
flames. )

=

=

Experimental simulation of premixed flames using autocatalytic chemical reactions
The PI has introduced the us e of aqueous autocatalytic propagating chemical
fronts (in particular, the arsenous acid- iodate system) for the experimental
simulation of premixed combustion in nonuniform and unsteady flows [13]. These
fronts more nearly match the assumptions made by most relevant theoretical models
that do gaseous flames. These assumptions include that of constant density . The
role of density change (due to heat release) in gaseous premixed flame
propagation has been a continuing source of controversy, especially in turbulent
flows.
It has not even been established whether density changes resu l t in an
increase or decrease in the turbulent flame propagation rate (ST)
[13].
Consequently, it is desirable to compare front propagation in gaseous f l ames and
aqueous autocatalytic fronts to study effects of density change.
A limitation on the utility of aqueous fronts is that even the small
fractional density change across the aqueous front leads to significant buoyancy
influences at one-g because of the very low planar front propagation rate (S L)'
Only when the imposed disturbance intensity (u') is much greater than buoyancyinduced flow velocities can buoyant effects be neglected. Gaseous flames wit
u' »
SL cannot be observed because of quenching which results from the
hydrodynamic strain at high U
u'/S L ; this makes it impossible to compare the
aqueous and gaseous front propagation at the same U, and thereby assess the role
of density changes. High U is also inaccessible to computational studies because
of numerical difficulties, especially when density changes are included.
This discussion indicates the need for studying aqueous fronts at ~g to
eliminate buoyancy influences, enabling the study of front propagation at low U
and thereby allowing comparison of front propagation in aqueous and gaseous
fronts at the same u'/S L.
We have studied these autocatalytic propagating fronts in a Taylor-Couette
flow, i.e. in the annulus between two rotating concentric cylinders. This flow
was chosen because (1) the flow is homogeneous in the direction of front

=

161

propa gation (axia lly), so that a quasi -stea dily
propa gating front can be studie d,
and (2) well- chara cteriz ed distur bance s are gener
ated even at very low Reyno lds
numbe rs (and thus low u ' ).
When only the inner cylin der is rotate d, pairs
of
count er-ro tating toroi dal vorte x pair (Taylo r
vortic es) fill the annul us. Fig.
4 shows the measu red [13] effec t of u' /SL on ST/ SL
in
the predi ction s of a theor etica l model [13]; agreem the Taylo r-vor tex regim e and
e nt is good. (Data were taken
up to u' /SL = 10 ,0 00 , but only the lower value s
of U'/SL are of inter est to this
study in that the y may be affec ted by buoya ncy)
.
Our scalin g analy sis has shown that in a space
exper iment , it is possi ble
to study aqueo us front s with U = 7 at g = 10- 4
g o (a typic al figur e for space
exper iment s ) witho ut buoya nt conve ction, where
as U = 140 is the lowes t possi ble
U at g = go witho ut buoya nt conve ction.
It is possi ble to study U = 7 in gas
combu stion witho ut quenc hing, where as U = 140
is not possi ble.
Thus, space
exper iment s would enabl e us to study the aqueo us
front s at v alues of U acces sible
to gas combu stion exper iment s and nume rical simul
ation s, enabl ing us to creat e
a "bridg e" bet ween studi es of front s with
and witho ut subst antia l densi ty
chang es.
Refer ences
'1.

'2.

3.
"4.

'5.

.. 6.

Ronne y, P.D .,
"On the Mecha nisms of Flame Propa gation Limit
s and
Extin cti on Proce sses at Micro gravi ty," Twent y
Secon
tiona l) on Comb ustion , Comb ustion Instit ute, 1988, d Sympo sium (Inter napp. 1615- 1623.
Abbud -Madr id, A., Ronne y, P. D. , "Effe cts of
Radia tive and Diffu sive
Trans port Pro cesse s on Premi xed Flame s Near Flamm
Third Sympo sium (Inter natio nal) on Comb ustion , Combabilit y Limit s," Twent y
ustion Insti tute, 1990,
pp. 423 - 4 31 .
Jouli n,
G.,
Eudie r,
M.
Twent y-Seco nd Sympo sium
( Inter natio nal)
on
Comb ustion , Comb ustion Insti tute, 1988, p. 1579.
Abbud -Madr id, A., Ronne y, P. D . , "Effe cts of
Parti culat e Radia tion on
Premi sed Gas Flame s," AIM 31st Aeros pace Scien
ces Meeti ng, Jan. 11-14 ,
1993, Reno, NV (to be prese nted . )
Ronne y, P . D., "Near -Limi t Flame Struc
tures at Low Lewis Numb er,"
Comb ustion and Flame 82, 1-14 ( 1990)
Ronne y, P. D., Whali ng, K. N., Abbud -Madr id, A.,
Gatto ,
L.,
"On Statio nary Premi xed Flame s in Spher ical J. L. Pisow icz, V .
and Cylin drica l
Geome tries, " s ubmit ted to Proce eding s of the Royal
Socie ty (Londo n) Serie s
A (1992 ).

"7.

Buckm aster, J. D., Jouli n, G. , Ronne y , P. D., "Stru
cture and Stabi lity of
Non-a diaba tic Flame Balls :
II. Effec ts of Far-F ield Losse s," Combu stion
and Flame 8 4, 411-4 22 (1991)

"8.

Buckm aster, J . B., Gessm an, R., Ronne y, P. D.
, "The Three -Dime nsion al
Dynam ics o f Flame Balls ," Twent y-Fou rth Inter
natio nal Sympo sium on
Comb ustion , 1992 (to appea r in the Proce eding s)
.

9.

Buckm aster, J . D. and Smook e, M. "Ana lytica l
and
Flame -Balls in Hydro gen-A ir Mixtu res," subm itted Nume rical Mode lling of
to Comb ustion and Flame .
Buckm aster, J. D., Combu st. Sci. Tech. 84, 163
(1992 ).

10.
11.

Spald ing, D. B., Proc. Roy. Soc.

12 .

Levy, A., Proc . Roy. Soc. (Londo n) A283, 134 (1965
).
Shy, S. S., Ronne y, P. D., Buckl ey S. G.,
Yakho
Simul ation of Premi xed Turbu lent Comb ustion Using t, V., "Expe rimen tal
Aqueo us Autoc atalyt ic
React ions," Twent y-Fou rth Intern ation al Sympo sium
on Comb ustion , 1992, (to
appea r in the Proce eding s) .

"13.

162

(Londo n) A240, 83 (1957)

1-Other work supported by the NASA-Lewis:
'Farmer, J. N., Ronney, P. D., "A Numerical Study of Unsteady Nonadi abatic
Flames," Combustion Science and Technology 73, 555-574 (1990).
'Buckmaster, J. D., Joulin, G., Ronney, P. D. , "Effects of Heat Loss on the
Structure and Stability of Flame Balls," combustion and Flame 79: 381-392 (1990).
""Effects of Ambient Atmosphere on Flame Spreading a nd Extin c t ion," Workshop on
Spacecraft Fire Safety Risk Analysis Assessment, Oc t . 3 1 - Nov. 1 , 1991, Los
Angeles, CA (I n vited presentation) .
""New Premixed Gas Combustion Phenomena," Gordo n Resea r ch Con f erence on
Gravitational Effects in Physico-Chemical Systems, J une 1 6-2 1, 1991, P l ymouth,
NH .
( Invited Presentation) .
" Ra nne y, P. D. , " An I n vestigator's Suggestions for Eff e c t ive u s e of the NASA-JSC
Reduced Grav i t y Program KC-1 3 SA Aircraft," in : JSC Re d uced Gra v ity Program User 's
Guide , NASA JSC- 22 803, Ju ly 1991.
"Buc kmaster , J. D. , Lee, C. J. , Jo ul in, G., Ronney, P. D., "Modelling o f
Microgravity Ignition Experiments," in: Recent Advances in Combustion Mode l ling
(B. Larrouturou, ed.), Series in Advances in Mathematics for Applied Sciences,
Vol. 6, pp. 1-18, World Scientific Press, Teaneck, NJ, 1991.
'W
ork supported by NASA-Lew is u nd e r grant NAG3-965
"Work supp o r ted by NASA- Le wis u nd er g rant NAG3-1242

- - - Burning velocity

.... .

Peak P

U
~

Vl

'-

]

.c

'0
0
Qj

2.2

2.0

c

'2
...
;:l

co

....--

..

~

-----

------

1.8

'";j
It>

,....

III

4

~

"'0
...,

~

3.75

I

,
,

It>

II>
(J)

c
..,
It>

3.5

~
III

~

I'

3.25

~

1.6
0.00

.......
Vl
c

4.25

I

>
bC

1600

4.5

2.4

6.00
4.00
2.00
Mass of particles in chamber

~

'-"

,
,

1000

C

e

Q)

....

::l
<0
....
~
n.
E
~

800
600
400

j

,I"

1200

200
0.00

3
8.00

~

~

j
~

1
-O.25g
----- 0.75 g
- - - 2.0g

l

J

1
,

~

r,
I'
I

0.20

-<

Thermocouple at 4.5 cm
from spark gap
0.40
0.60
Time (seconds)

0.80

Figure 2. Thermal characteristics of
fl ames in particle-laden mixtures.
Mixture: 5.25% CH. in air.

Fi gure 1 . Propagation rate s a nd peak
p r e s sures of particle - laden f lame s.
Mi xture : 5. 25 % CH 4 i n a i r .

163

I

'>

OJ

1400

j

1.00

Up ward Pr op .. al ion
<>
•

o
•
•

Le.Q.2
Le ..o.J
Le "(>.7
Le",1

Lc-U

Le _1.8
Le-2.3

Lc",2.1

Figure 3 . I R image o f "fla me stri ng "
at ~g. Mi x tu re : 5.5 % H2 i n air.

Figure 4 . Limit Peclet numbe r versus
Gra s hof number f o r upward-pro pagating
flames in tube s .

80
Do"n"ltd Prop.,.lIon

·
·
·

~...,

Le..o.2

- - - Theo r y

(f)

Le.Q.3
Le.().1
Lo-'
Le.. l.S
Le- l.a
Lo-2

J-..

'"

(f)

60

SL = 0.0023 em /s

~

•

S L = 0.0051 em /s

:::
0

0

SL = 0.0071 em /s

...
til

Le·2.)

Le-2.7

til

40

co

'"
...
0..
0..
0

"2
0

...
.,..

c,
.~

20

.~

0

0

SO

100

ISO

Disturbance Intensity (u '/SL)

Figure 5. Limit Peclet number versus
Gr ashof
number
for
downwardpropagating flames in tubes.

Figure 6 .
Effect of disturbance
intensity o n fr o nt propagation rate
in aque o us autocatalytic sys tem .

164

200

MODELING OF MICROGRAVITV COMBUSTION EXPERIMENTS
John Buckmaster
University of Illinois
Urbana, Illinois 6180 1

Introduction
Modeling plays a vital role in providing physical insights into behavior revealed by experiment.
The program at the University of illinois is designed to improve our understanding of basic
combustion phenomena through the analytical and numerical modeling of a variety of
configurations undergoing experimental study in NASA's microgravity combustion program.
Significant progress has been made in two areas: (i) flame-balls, studied experimentally by
Ronney and his co-workers [1]; (ii) particle-cloud flames studied by Berlad and his collaborators
[2]. Additional work is mentioned below. NASA funding for the U. of Illinois program
commenced in February 1991 but work was initiated prior to that date and the program can only be
understood with this foundation exposed. Accordingly, we start with a brief description of some
key results obtained in the pre - 2/91 work.
Harne Balls - Results Prior to 2/91
Flame-balls are stationary, premixed spherical flames observed in certain near-limit mixtures [1].
They have zero flame-speed. Their study is likely to lead to an improved understanding of
flammability limits. The configuration is sketched in Fig. 1.
Reference [3J, The structure and stability of non adiabatic flame-balls, provides the first description
of mathematically stable flame-balls. The stabilizing mechanism is heat loss by thennal radiation.
The analysis assumes that the Lewis number (Le) is significantly less than 1. Only for such
mixtures are flame-balls observed.
Reference [4], The structure and stability of non adiabatic flame-baLLs: ll. Effects offar-field
losses, is an extension of Ref. [3]. For physical flames there will be losses in the near-field (in
and near the burnt gas) and the far-field. Dealing simultaneously with both leads to technical
(mathematical) difficulties and these are dealt with here. Differences in the effects of the two losses
are revealed by Fig. 2. Near-field losses can generate a three-dimensional instability (the upper
thick portion of curve A), far-field losses do not. The lower thick portions of both curves defme
regions of one-dimensional instability. Note that for curve B this includes a portion of the top
solution branch.
Flame-balls are only observed if Le is sufficiently small ($ 0.5?) In Ref. [5J. The structure and
stability offlame-balls: A near-equidiffusional flame analysis, it is shown that radiation is not
stabilizing when Le = 1 and there is a critical Lewis number Le c « 1) such that stability requires
Le < Lec. The closer Le is to Lee the smaller is the range of parameter values for which stable
solutions exist.

165

Flame-balls can be stabilized by heat loss other than by radiation. Convective heat losses generated
by weak shear or straining flows are discussed in Ref. [6], Flame balls stabilized by suspension in
fluid with a steady linear ambient velocity distribution. These are far-field losses. As noted
earlier, a key difference between near-field and far-field losses is that the former can give rise to
three-dimensional instabilities, the laner do not (see Ref. [9], discussed below).
Flame-Balls - Post 2/9 1 Resul ts

In flame-ball experiments carried out in the KC-135 (see Ronney, this proceedings), unsteady
flame-strings have been observed. A straight flame-string is a cylindrical counterpart to the
spherical flame-ball. Flame-strings display a sausage or peristaltic instability. These instabilities
are analyzed in Ref. [7]. For perturbations - e aJ + ikx where x is distance measured along the
cylinder axis, Fig. 3 shows the manner in which a varies with the wave-number k. The flame
structures must have a minimum length if they are to support unstable waves, i.e. short cylinders
are stable.
Reference [8], Influence of boundary-induced losses on the structure and dynamics offlame -balls,
shows that conductive heat losses to a cold wall can stabilize flame- balls. Configurations of this
ki nd might well be important fo r space experiments designed to examine the structure of a
stationary flame-b all.
The results of Ref. [3], [4] imply the response sketched in Fig. 4. This shows the maximum
temperature in a flame-bali as a function of mixture strength. The stable region lies between points
A and B. The implication is that insufficiently reactive mixtures can not support flame balls (static
quenching at A' or dynamic quenching at A); and that overly reactive mixtures will lead to nonspherical flame-balls. These conclusions are consistent with experiment
The point B is a neutral stability point for three-dimensional instabilities and a transcritical
bifurcation analysis can be carried out, valid in the neighborhood of B, which describes unsteady
three-dimensional, weakly-nonlinear deformations of the flame-hall. In Ref. [9] , Th e threedimensional dynamics offlame -balls, an equation fo r the flame-ball shape is derived:
x2

I + 42 . 8K
4 (tc -t )

(i + z2)
1 _ 3J. 8K

+--'-:-~~-=l
'

(1 )

4 . (tc -t )

where 8K is a positive parameter that vanishes at B, and tc is a critical time at which 'blow-up'
occurs. Equation (1) describes the flrst observable manifestation of the instability, and
corresponds to an elongating prolate spheroid. Prolate spheroids have been observed by Ronney.
The experimental spheroids, once they become long enough, neck and split. We believe that this is
due to the flame-string instability discussed in Ref. [7].
The analytical work of Ref. [3] - [9] has been remarkably successful in providing a description of
flame-balls that agrees, qualitatively, with the experimental observations. Quantitative
comparisons are only meaningful with detailed numerical simulations, and a program of this kind
has recently been embarked upon in collaboration with M. Smooke. Figure 5 shows the
variations of maximum temperature with mixture strength described in Ref. [10], Analytical and
numerical modeling offlame-balls in H2/air mixtures. This work predicts a static flammability
limit of 3.5% H2 by volume. This is close to the experimental value. Predicted flame-ball sizes

166

are consistent with observations but precise comparison is not possible at this time since the nature
of the experimental image is uncertain.
It is clear that at this time an unusually strong synthesis of experiment, theory and numerical work
has elucidated the physics of flame-balls.
Aame- Balls - Future Plans
In all the work completed to date radiation losses are only accounted for within the framework of
an optically thin field. There is reason to believe that this is not always correct, and a more general
approach is under development.

Additional numerical work is planned. It would be appropriate to construct steady solutions for the
various mixtures that have been used experimentally. Moreover, because of the importance of the
stability boundaries in defining the existence of flame-balls it is important to identify them
numerically. This would not be excessively difficult for the one-dimensional stability boundary,
but the three-dimensional boundary is a different matter. Reduced chemistry schemes might be
useful in this connection.
Particle Cloud Aames
Reference [2] describes experiments on flames propagating in particle-air mixtures. A mixture of
lycopodium and air in a tube that is open at one end, closed at the other, is ignited at the open end.
For some mixture strengths and flame locations unsteady propagation is observed which, we
believe, is driven by an acoustic instability. Reference [11], An acoustic instability theory for
particle-cloud flames, contains a mathematical description of a plausible mechanism. Because of
slip (thennal and kinematic) between the two phases, an acoustic wave generates fluctuations in the
mixture flux fraction entering the flame; there are time dependent fluctuations in the difference
between the particle velocity and the gas velocity relative to the flame. These fluctuations generate
variations in the heat generated by combustion, and these can drive the acoustic wave via the wellknown Rayleigh criterion. Apart from the inclusion of slip the flame model is similar to that of
Seshadri et al (this proceedings).
Additional theoretical aspects are briefly discussed in Ref. [12], The structure and stability of
laminar flames. It is well known that a classical (gaseous) unbounded deflagration can support a
pulsating instability if Le is large enough, but this constraint demands exotic mixtures. However,
modifications to the flame configuration can move the domain of instability and make it accessible
to certain everyday mixtures. Heat loss to a burner is such a modification. Supplying the fuel in
particle fonn is another. It is possible, therefore, that the instability observed by Berlad et al is
intrinsic in nature, albeit modified by the acoustic constraints, rather than the acoustic creature
discussed in Ref. [11]. These and related aspects are presently being explored. However, the
tennination of the experimental program limits the progress that can be expected in our
understanding of these flames. In view of the importance of particle cloud burning, and
recognizing that the microgravity environment is exceptionally congenial for its study, this author
believes that a new initiative in the area would be most valuable, preferably one tied closely to
modeling efforts.
Self-Extinguishing Flames
Self-extinguishing flames (SEFs) are generated by the point ignition of certain near-limit mixtures
[13]. An essential characteristic of a SEF is that it extinguishes at a radius of several centimeters
after the release of chemical energy several orders of magnitude greater than the spark initiation
energy. Because of this disparity one might expect that the final behavior of these flames is
independent of the spark energy, but that is not the case. A SEF which ~xtinguishes after releasing

L - -_ _ _ _ __

167

__ _
~

_

_

_

_

_

energy equal to 103 times the spark energy can be converted to a non-extinguishing flame by
doubling the spark energy. We have been engaged in attempts to understand this sensitivity by the
use of simple asymptotic treatments. In Ref. [14], The effects of confinement and heat loss on
outwardly propagating spherical flames, asymptotic methods are used to derive a model equation
for the evolution of the spherical flame:
(2)

Here R is the flame radius, t is time, L is a heat-loss parameter that accounts for radiative losses,
and k is a confinement parameter that accounts for the pressure rise in the fixed volume chamber.
Solutions to equation (2) can display extreme sensitivity to the initial data, as exemplified by Fig.
6. However, we are not prepared to claim that confinement effects are significant in Ronney's
experiments, but merely present these results as a simple example of sensitivity.
Acknowledgment
The work described here was supported by the NASA-Lewis Research Center, and by AFOSR. It
owes its genesis to the unusual intellectual generosity of Paul Ronney. After discovering flameballs in the laboratory, he came to the opinion that radiation plays a key role in their existence and
invited me to Princeton and asked me if I thought that it would be possible to do some modeling.
That question, his videotapes, and his physical insights, have fueled this endeavor.
References
[1 ]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

Ronney,P. Combust. Flame , .81, 1990, 1-14 .
Berlad,A., Ross,H., Facca,L., and Tangirala,V. Combust. Flame,.81, 1990,448-450.
Buckmaster,}., Joulin,G. , and Ronney,P. Combust. Flame, 7!l, 1990,38 1-392.
Buckmaster,}. , Joulin,G., and Ronney,P. Combust. Flame, BA, 1991,411-422.
Lee,e., and Buckmaster,}. SIAM 1. Appl. Math ., 5.1, 1991,1315-1326.
BuckmasterJ., and Joulin,G. 1. Fluid Mech., ill, 1991,407-427.
B uckmasterJ . Combust. Sci. and Techno!., M, 1992, 163.
BuckmasterJ., and Joulin,G. Combust. Sci. and Technol., in press.
Buckmaster,}. , Gessman,R., and Ronney,P. 24th Symposium, in press.
Buckmaster,}., and Smooke,M. Submitted. Some results from this paper were presented
in a poster session at the 24th Symposium, and are recorded in the book of abstracts.
Buckmaster,}., and Clavin,P. 24th Symposium, in press.
Buckmaster,I. Article in Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 25, to appear,1993.
Ronney,P. Combust. Flame, ~, 1985, 121.
Buckmaster,}., and Lee,e. 24th Symposium, in press.

168

18
18
~AT + PRonuCTS
~AT + PRO~UCTS

R
Rz

~

exp (5/2)
exp (5/2)

9
9

HOTllURNT
HOT BURNT

1(1 Ar n ON
1(1 Af'nON

GAS
GAS

ZilNI.IIl.AMI
l.(INI II1.AMI II

I/
/

"-

B
B

A
A

~

o
a

dtnOles di ffusional nux
dcn()(es diffus ional flu.

Fig.I.
flame
flaml!-speed
Fig.I . Stationary flam e ball. The flam~-sreed is zero and
mixture reaches the reaction zone hy diffusion.
reactio n
diffusion.

o

II

0.1

P
o

; 0.2
: 0.2
(2ef 1
(2ej" 1

0.3
0 .3

II

a,~
(l,

-1
e- 1

Fig.2. Flame-ball radius VS. heat loss. Curve A is
Fig.2.
vs.
loss.
appropriate for near-field losses, cuve B for far-field losses.

0\
\0

0.08

I

0.06
0 .06\

0
.04,

0 .04

0 .02
0.02

./

,

/

0a.

J

\

j

E
Q)
~

f0-

AI
A'

x
CI:l
ro

:E

0
-0.02
-0 .02

0
0

0.2

0.4

Fig.3. Growth rate a VS. wave-numner k ror flameFig.3. Growth rate a VS. wavt.:-numher k for flam ecylinders. Short cylinders will he stank.
cylinders. Short cylinders will he s tahl~.

P

e

Equivalence Ratio
Fig.4. Flame-ball response showing a
region
Fig.4. Flame-baH respo nse showi ng a stable region
hetwecn the points A and B.
the points A and B.
hetween

1500

w 1000

~

Fig.5. Nume rical
results for flame-balls
in hydrog en/air
mixt.ures, showi ng the
maxImum
temperature vs.
equiva lence ratio
(solid line).

~

w

§S
W

E-

~

500

~
o

~

__

o

~

__

- L_ _

~

_ _ _ _L -_ _

~

__

~

~

___

4

3

2

1

____

EQUIVALENCE RATIO

~

)00

i

I

,
................................. _.....................J

R0

J. ; . (0)=0.0 25 .

'1'(O) =O . ~SJ

2. ; . (0)= 0 .069 , '1' ( 0 ) =0 . 363
3.

~.

(0 )=0 . 1 29 ,

'1'(0)=0 . 332

4.

60

~ . ( 0 ) =0.137,

'1' ( 0)=0.308

..... _.. -............... _.-

40

Fig.6. Flame front
speed vs. flame radius
for differe nt initial
condit ions showi ng
sensitivity when
confin ement effects
are accounted for. At
first the curves come
together, but their
final fate depends on
the initial data.

2.0

--L.'0.0 '--_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _---'-_ _

--_~

o

6

Flame Radius{ anl

8

)0

)2

c,.
170

I
~

STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF PREMIXED FLAMES IN MICROGRAVITY
K. Kailasanath
Naval Research Laboratory
Laboratory for Computational Physics & Fluid Dynamics
Washington, D. C. 20375
and
G. Patnaik
Berkeley Research Associates
Springfield , Virginia 22150

Introduction
In this report we describe the research performed at the Naval Research Laboratory in support of the NASA Microgravity Science and Applications Program over the past three years with
emphasis on the work performed since February 1992, the beginning of the current project. The
focus of our research has been on investigating fundamental combustion questions concerning the
propagation and extinction of gas-phase flames in microgravity and earth-gravity environments.
Our approach to resolving these fundamental questions has been to use detailed time-dependent,
multidimensional numerical models to perform carefully designed computational experiments. The
basic questions we have addressed, a general description of the numerical approach, and a summary
of the results are described in this report. More detailed discussions are available in the papers
published which are referenced herein.
A systematic study which isolates the various processes that could lead to flame instabilities
and extinction is needed to gain a better understanding of flammability limits and flame dynamics
in microgravity. Numerical simulations, in which the various physical and chemical processes
can be independently controlled, can significantly advance our understanding of flame instabilities
and flammability limits on earth and in a microgravity environment. In the past three years,
we have addressed a number of basic issues aimed at resolving some of the important aspects
of flame structure and propagation. Some of the issues we have addressed using our numerical
simulations are: the effects of heat losses and buoyancy forces on the structure and stability of
flames(both burner-stabilized and flames in tubes), the existence of flammability limits in the
absence of external losses or buoyancy forces in the system, and the extinguishment process at the
downward-propagation limit.

Computational Tools
Two computational models developed at NRL, FLIC2D and FLAMEID, have been used in
the work reported here. Both the numerical models are time-dependent and solve the multispecies
coupled partial differential reactive-flow equations. These models include a detailed chemical kinetics mechanism coupled to algorithms for convection, thermal conduction, viscosity, molecular
diffusion, thermal diffusion, and external forces. The external force, gravity, can be in any direction
relative to flame propagation and can have a range of values. Energy sources and sinks may also be
prescribed as a function of time. All of the chemical and physical processes are solved sequentially
and then coupled asymptotically by timestep splitting [I].

l71

FLIC2D, a two-dimensional model, has been used extensively to study cellular flames [2,3]'
the effects of gravity and heat losses on the structure and dynamics of lean hydrogen-air flames
[4-8]. FLAME1D has been applied to various studies of flame phenomena including calculations
of burning velocities, minimum ignition energies and quenching distances, effects of curvature and
dilution, and flammability limits [9-11]. This one-dimensional model is generally used to test new
sub-models such as for radiation and chemistry before implementing them in the multidimensional
model. It is also used to study physical and chemical phenomena in which multidimensional effects
are secondary. Space restriction does not allow the elaboration of the models here but details can be
found in previous reports [9,12]. These models are also continuously evolving. Some of the recent
additions to the models are the inclusion of wall effects and radiation, heat losses to a burner,
moving adaptive grids and a parallel implementation of chemistry solver.
Summary of Research
Our recent research can be broadly divided into four categories: (a) dynamics of cellular
flames [3], (b) effects of gravity, heat losses and viscosity on flame instabilities and structure[4-6]'
(c) extinguishment process at the lean-flammability limit[7,8] and (d) instabilities near the richflammability limit[13]. Each of these categories are briefly discussed below.

Dynamics of Cellular Flames
Our initial simulations [2] of cellular flames were in qualitative agreement with experimental
observations on the stability of flames in lean and rich hydrogen-oxygen-nitrogen mixtures [14] and
were also able to identify the thermo-diffusive instability mechanism as the primary mechanism
responsible for the formation of cellular flames in hydrogen-oxygen-nitrogen mixtures in most systems. We then used the simulations to investigate the cell-split limit phenomena observed in the
NASA drop tower [15] experiments.
We simulated the structure and dynamics of flames in a series of mixtures with 15% or less
hydrogen in air. We observed brisk formation of cells and their subsequent splitting in lean mixtures
with more than 11% hydrogen. In leaner mixtures with 9.5-11% hydrogen, the formation and
splitting of cells is less vigorous. For mixtures with 9% or less hydrogen, a single cell is formed
which does not split at all. For these mixtures, even calculations for very long times (0.4 seconds)
in larger systems (1O.2 cm channel width) did not show any indications of cell-splitting.
Heat losses have been postulated as a mechanism that can cause a cell-split limit. However,
the simulations in this study do not include any loss mechanism; yet such a limit is still observed.
This suggests that external loss mechanisms are not required and that the cell-split limit is actually
an intrinsic feature of the lean hydrogen-air mixture itself. However, the actual mixture at which
cell splitting ceases may be affected by losses.

Effects of Gravity, Heat losses and Viscosity on Flame Instabilities and Structure
We have performed a systematic series of investigations to isolate and study the role of gravity,
heat losses and viscosity on the structure and stability of flames. In the first series, we isolated the
effects of gravity by comparing upward- and downward-propagating flames to zero-gravity flames
in idealized two-dimensional systems in which the effects of viscosity and heat losses to the wall
can be ignored [4,5].
These simulations showed that the effects of gravity become more important as the lean
flammability limit is approached. In mixtures with 12% or more of hydrogen in air, gravity plays
only a secondary role, with the stability and structure of the flame controlled primarily by the
thermo-diffusive instability mechanism. However, in leaner hydrogen-air mixtures gravity becomes
more important. Upward-propagating flames are highly curved and evolve into a bubble rising
upwards in the tube. Downward-propagating flames are flat or even oscillate between structures
with concave and convex curvatures. The zero-gravity flame shows only cellular structures. Cellular structures which are present in zero gravity can be suppressed by the effect of buoyancy for

172

J

mixtures leaner than 11% hydrogen. These observations have been compared to theoretical and
experimental observations [4] and have been explained on the basis of an interaction between the
processes leading to buoyancy-induced Rayleigh-Taylor instability and the thermo-diffusive instability. These results also indicate that the instability mechanisms can interact in a quite complex
manner, and even though one mechanism can mask the other, in certain regimes, both can be
equally important.
In many practical applications as well as in the determination of flammability limits, flames
are confined. Heat and radical losses will occur to the confining walls and the flow will also have
to come to rest at the surface of the walls. Our simulations indicate that viscous effects play only
a secondary role whe n the walls are assumed to be isothermal. However, heat losses to the walls
playa dominant role resulting in the formation of additional cellular structures near but slightly
displaced from the walls.
We also investigated how gravity modifies the structure and dynamics of flames in an isothermal, two-dimensional channel [6]. Heat losses are found to significantly modify upward- and
downward-propagating flames. In the upward-propagating case, instead of a single bubble rising
in the tube, a two-fingered flame is observed. This flame has some features similar to experimentally observed flames in lean hydrogen-air mixtures. The downward-propagating flame is also quite
different when the effect of heat losses are considered. In this case, a flame is "visible" only in
the central portion of the channel(see figure). Again, this flame is qualitatively similar to some
near-limit flames in experiments. Therefore, we decided to do further simulations including the
effects of heat losses to isothermal walls to gain some insight into the dynamical behavior observed
experimentally in flames near extinguishment.

Extinguisbment Process at the Lean-Flammability Limit
The experimentally observed flammability limit is between 9 and 10% for downward flame
propagation in lean Hydrogen-air mixtures. Therefore further simulations including the effect of
wall heat losses were carried out for flames in 10%, 9.75%, 9.5% and 9% hydrogen-air mixtures.
The computational results show that a downward propagating flame in an isothermal channel has
a flammability limit of around 9.75%. The details of the extinguishment process in tltis mixture
has been analysed and found to be in excellent agreement with experimental observations.
In experiments, the flame is first observed to halt its downward propagation and then actually
move back up into the burnt products[ 16] . From the simulations we can understand tIl(' reason
for this observed behavior. The simulations indicate that the flame is quenched at the ',\ :tlls and
tongues of colder gases, comprised mainly of burnt products flow down the sides. At the same time,
t here is an upward motion of the gases at the center of the channel, causing the name to rise up
into the burnt products. Further simulations also indicate that the dilution of the unburnt mixture
with the products of combustion is an essential step in the extinguishment
Our earlier simulations have shown that a flame can propagate downward in a 9% mixture in a
channel with adiabatic walls and cellular flames occur in this mixture in a zero-gravity environment.
These observations taken in conjunction with our current simulations indicate that both heat
losses and gravity are simultaneously required to cause the observed limit. A general conclusion
from this work is that detailed numerical simulations that include wall heat losses can adequately
simulate the dynamics of the extinguishment process in downward-propagating flames [8]. At the
upward-propagation limit, the flames are highly three-dimensional and therefore must await the
development of a three-dimensional model for a complete description.

Instabilities Near the Rich-Flammability Limit
A fundamental question that has not yet been fully resolved is the existence of an intrinsic
flammability limit in a zero-gravity environment. In the absence of buoyancy forces, there are many
competing factors such as preferential diffusion, flame chemistry, conductive and radiative heat

173

losses, the aerodynamics of burnt gases, and flame stretch that can cause or modify flammability
limits. Numerical simulations provide an ideal way to systematically isolate and evaluate the role
of various factors.
We have conducted a systematic study of flames in rich hydrogen-air mixtures[13] . Because
these flames are nearly one-dimensional, we conducted these investigations with the FLAMEID
code. The numerical simulations indicate that a steady burning velocity is not obtained for very
rich hydrogen-air mixtures. As the amount of hydrogen is increased, at first a damped oscillation
is observed in the flame and burning velocities, and then with further increase in the amount of
hydrogen, an undamped oscillation with a complex set of frequencies is observed. Simulations
with a simplified one-step irreversible chemical reaction do not show these oscillations, suggesting
that chemical kinetics plays a strong role in inducing these oscillations. Further analysis shows
that the oscillations are due to a competition for H atoms between chain branching and chainterminating reactions. However, the limiting mixture predicted by these simulations is beyond the
experimentally observed limit. These differences may be because of the neglect of phenomena such
as stretch and radiative heat losses.
Simulations of spherically expanding flames suggest that stretch effects (due to curvature)
will cause the oscillations to occur in less rich mixtures than that observed for planar flames.
F\rrther calculations including multidimensional effects and radiative and conductive heat losses
are needed to quantitatively determine the flammability limits in zero-gravity as well as to more
fully understand the significance of the instability induced by chemical kinetics.
Work in Progress
The calculations discussed above have lead to a better understanding of the structure and
propagation of flames. We now understand the reasons for some of the observed differences in the
structure of upward and downward propagating flames. We also have a detailed description of the
extinguishment process in downward-propagating flames and rich hydrogen-air flames. However,
these simulations have also brought up a number of unresolved issues which need to be examined.
Four major issues which need to be addressed are: (1) What is the role of radiation in near-limit
flame phenomena, especially for hydrocarbon flames? (2) Will the extinguishment process and the
relative importance of various instability mechanisms be the same for hydrocarbon flames as for
hydrogen fl ames ? (3) Are burner-stabilized flames significantly different from freely propagating
flames ? and (4) How does three-dimensionality modify the observations from the two-dimensional
simulations ?
These are the issues that we are currently focussing on in our research efforts. \Ve have
implemented a sub-model that accounts for radiation from water in our one-dimensional flame
code . Simulations using this model indicate that for the wide range of hydrogen-air mixtures (from
lean to rich) , radiative loss plays only a minor role in modifying the flame properties. A submodel to account for radiation losses from CO 2 is being developed for inclusion in our studies of
hydrocarbon flames.
Detailed reaction mechanisms are available for some hydrocarbons but the cost of including
such mechanisms in time-dependent, multidimensional simulations is very high. The solution of
the chemical rate equations would take a significant portion of the computer time because of the
large number of species and the large number of rate equations involved in a mechanism consisting
of hundreds of elementary reactions. The major advances being made in parallel computing will
probably be the crucial factor enabling us to simulate the hydrocarbon flames to the same level
of detail as we do with the hydrogen flames . Currently, we are working on a parallel-processing
approach for doing our multidimensional flame simulations. Meanwhile, continuing efforts are also
being made to reduce the cost of doing detailed multidimensional simulations.
One approach to reducing the cost of multidimensional flame simulations is to use a greatly
simplified reaction mechanism. However , some important phenomena may be missed by using a
174

~-

-.--~

- --

-

overly simplified mechanism. An intermediate approach is to use a skeletal mechanism (17, 18J
which retains many characteristics of the detailed reaction mechanism. Results from using such a
skeletal mechanism can then be compared to those using the more reduced reaction mechanisms
to evaluate their validity and performance. With this approach in view, we are implementing
and testing the skeletal mechanism for methane in FLAMEID. After this, we plan to incorporate
the hydrocarbon chemistry along with the radiation model in FLIC2D and use it to simulate the
structure and dynamics of multidimensional flames in hydrocarbons.
Currently, we have also begun to simulate burner-stabilised flames in order to address the
effects of the burner on the structure and stabiity of cellular flames. Preliminary results indicate
that the tendency to cellular structure can be significantly affected by the presence of the burner.
A freely-propagating flame exhibiting vigorous cell-splitting can be stabilised at an inflow velocity
lower than the normal burning velocity to suppress the formation of cells. Factors such as the
details of the boundary-conditions imposed at the burner and the inflow velocity appear to playa
significant role on the observed flame dynamics.
Many other interesting flame phenomena observed in micro gravity are fully three-dimensional.
The development of simplified but validated radiation and chemistry models along with advances in
parallel computing of reacting flows are required to simulate the detailed dynamics of such flames.
References
1. Oran, E.S., and Boris, J.P., Numerical Simulation of Reactive Flow, Elsevier, New York, 1987.
2. Patnaik, G., Kailasanath, K, Laskey, K.J., and Oran, E.S., 22th Symposium (International) on
Combustion, pp. 1517-1526, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1989.
3. Patnaik, G. and Kailasanath, K, AIAA Paper No. 90-0041, AIAA, Washington, D.C., 1990.
4. Patnaik, G., Kailasanath, K, and Oran, E.S., AIAA Paper No. 89-0502, AIAA, NY, 1989. (also
see AIAA Journal, Vol. 29, pp. 2141-2148, 1991.)
5. Patnaik, G. and Kailasanath, K, Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium (International) on Combustion, pp. 1641-1647, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 1990.
6. Patnaik, G. and Kailasanath, K, AlA A Paper No. 91-0784, AIAA, Washington, D.C. , 1991.
7. Patnaik, G. and Kailasanath, K, AIAA Paper No. 92-0336, AIAA, Washington, DC,1992.
8. Patnaik, G. and Kailasanath, K, Proceedings of the 24th Symposium (International) on Combustion. The Combustion Institute, Pittsburg, PA., 1992.
9. Kailasanath, K, Oran, E.S., and Boris, J.P., NRL Memorandum Report No. 4910, Washington,
D.C., 1982.
10. Kailasanath, K. Oran, E.S., and Boris, J.P.,Combust. Flame. 47: 173- 190 (1982).
11. Kailasanath, K. and Oran, E.S., Prog. Aero. and Astro. 105, Part 1, 167-179 , 1986.
12. Patnaik, G. , Laskey, KJ., Kailasanath, K, Oran, E.S. and Brun, T.A., NRL Memorandum
Report 6555, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., September 1989.
13. Kailasanath, K , Ganguly, K. and Patnaik, K., Proceedings of the 13th International Colloquium on the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive Systems, Nagoya, Japan, July 1991.
14. Mitani, T., and Williams F.A., Combust. Flame. 39: 169-190 (1980).
15. Ronney, P., AIAA Paper No. 89-0157, AIAA, NY, 1989.
16. Jarosinski, J., Prog. Energy Combust . Sci., 12: 81-116 (1986) .
17. Paczko, G., Lefdal, P.M., and Peters, N., Proceedings of the 21st Symposium (International)
on Combustion. pp. 739-748, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburg, PA., 1988.
18. Rogg, B., Combust. Flame. 73: 43--65 (1988).

175

180 ms

140 ms

-

-...l
0\

100 ms

60ms
60 ms

~

g

20 ms
20ms

~
~

~

?
w

Upward Propagating

Grav ity
Zero Gravity

Downward Propagating

Comparison of OH concentration in upward- , zero-gravity
and downward- p ropagating flames with heat loss to walls.

I
I

-

-

-

-

-

- -- - -

-

I

I

ON THE STRUCTURE AND STABILIZATION MECHANISMS OF PLANAR
AND CYLINDRICAL PREMIXED FLAMES
James A. Eng, Delin Zhu , and Chung K. Law
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544

Introduction
The configurational simplicity of the stationary one-dimensional flames renders them
intrinsically attractive for fundamental flame strucrure studies. The possibility and fidelity of
studies of such flames on earth, however, have been severely restricted by the unidirectional
nature of the gravity vector. To demonstrate these complications, let us first consider the
premixed flame. Here a stationary, one-dimensional flame can be established by using the flatflame burner (Fig. I a). This flame, however, is inherently nonadiabatic because it is stabilized
through heat loss to the burner surface. Furthermore, radicals generated at the flame potentially
can also diffuse back to the burner surface and become deactivated. Such loss processes have
introduced uncertainties in the study of flame chemistry. Furthermore, even an adiabatic planar
flame can be produced by using the counterflow burner (Fig. 1b), where two symmetrical planar
flames are formed in the stagnation field of two opposed jets of premixed gases, the flame is
aerodynamically strained by the nonuniform flow field. The associated flame stretch effects can
significantly modify the flame properties from the idealized one-dimensional flame in the
doubly-infinite domain [1].
A class of one-dimensional flames that has the potential of eliminating heat loss and stretch
effects is the cylindrical and spherical flames, where a premixed gas flows through a porous
cylindrical (or spherical) burner and the resulting flame is formed at some distance from the
burner, as shown in Figs. Ic and Id. Since the flame is stationary and the flow velocity is in the
radial direction and thereby normal to the flame surface, it is curved but not stretched [1].
Furthermore, while the flame can be stabilized by heat loss to the burner, the divergent nat .rre of
the flow offers an additional stabilization mechanism. That is, as the flow rate is contil'" msly
increased the flame recedes from the burner and heat loss can be eventually reduced to become
negligible as compared to the heat generated at the flame. At this point the flame temperature is
almost equal to the adiabatic flame temperature. Further increases in the flow rate can be
accommodated by an increase in the flame standoff distance to a position where the flame speed
again balances the flow velocity. Thus, the cylindrical geometry offers a unique advantage for
the study of adiabatic, one-dimensional, stretch-free flames that is not present in other commonly
used experimental systems. It is, however, also clear that because of the distorting nature of the
buoyant flow, such a flame can only be established, and studied, in a microgravity (~g)
environment.
We next consider nonpremixed flames. First it may be noted that in an unbounded gravity-free
environment, the only stationary one-dimensional flame is the spherical flame. Indeed, this is a
major motivation for the study of microgravity droplet combustion, in which the gas-phase
processes can be approximated to be quasi-steady because of the significant disparity between
the gas and liquid densities for subcritical combustion. However, recent studies [2] have shown
that because of initial conditions, the combustion response such as the droplet burning rate and
the flame location still vary significantly with time. Such complications can be avoided by using
the spherical porous burner of Fig. Id, in which a truly steady spherical flame can be generated
in ~g by steadily feeding either a gaseous or a liquid fuel through the burner.
177

In view of the above considerations, an experimental and theoretical program on cylindrical and
spherical premixed and nonpremixed fl ames in microgravity has been initiated. For premixed
fla mes, we are interested in (1) assessing the heat loss versus flow divergence as the dominant
stabilization mechanism, (2) determining the laminar flame speed by using this configuration,
and (3) understanding the development of flamefront instability and the effects of flame
curvature on the burning intensity. For nonpremixed flames, we are interested in the state of
extinction and the properties of the soot layer formed in the inner region to the flame, as
observed in microgravity droplet experiments [3] . For both premixed and nonpremixed flames
the detailed dynamic, thermal, and chemical structures of the flame will also be studied through
laser-based instrumentation and computation with detailed chemistry.
As a starting point for the present program, we have performed a computational and normalgravity (ng) experimental investigation of the planar premixed flame over the flat flame burner,
which serve as a calibrating and referencing system for the study of cylindrical flames. We have
also performed theoretical, computational and Ilg experimental investigations of the cylindrical
flame, and will present comparisons between the planar and cylindrical fl ames.
Asymptotic Analysis and Qualitative Behavior
The nondimensional conservation equations for the reactant mass fractions Yi and temperature T
can be expressed for the cylindrical flame as
(1)

(2)

(3)

In the above the nondimensional quantities are r = rlrs , m= mcp/21tA., Y = YF/~ I' .
=
F
Y olllo~o, Lei = A/cpPsDj is the Lewis number of the itp ~ecie, T = CpT/qF, P = p/Pf, f.; , ::
~Jmo~ F' A is the burning rate eigenvalue, and E = 1"r / Ta is the small expansion parameter,
where T a is the activation temperature. Furthermore, r is the radial coordinate, rs the burner
radius, ~ i the mass flux fraction of the ith specie at the burner surface, Ilo is the stoichiometric
mass ratio between oxygen and fuel, p the density, Cp the mixture specific heat, A. the thermal
conductivity, Di the mass diffusivity of the ith specie, qF the energy release per unit mass of fuel
consumed, and m the mass flow rate per unit burner length. The boundary conditions are

r =1
r ---.

00 :

(4)

T , Y i bounded

(5)

where Ts is the burner surface temperature. The analysis was restricted to a fuel lean system with
a one-step irreversible reaction. The problem is now well defined, and the analysis proceeds
using the standard techniques of asymptotic analysis [4], with € as the small expansion
parameter.

178

-

--

~

---- - -~ .--

The proper independent variable for the system is the mass flow rate m, with the overall flame
response being the flame temperature, the standoff distance from the burner, and the heat loss to
the burner. The analysis yields the following expressions relating the nondimensional flame
temperature Tr, flame radius ff' and burner heat loss L to the normalized mass flow rate M=
m/Mo for the cylindrical geometry,

(6)

T
..:t

= 1- - 1 (- 1 )
Tad Tad 1;

-

(7)

- (~
1)
r

[ =-.!!!...( Tad - Tt} =~
-0
m-o
m

_m

(8)

f

where Tad is the adiabatic flame temperature and mO = 21trsPsSu° is a reference flow rate based on
the laminar flame speed. NOJe that due to divergence M can have a value greater then one. The
nondimensional heat loss is L = UmoMF , where L is the heat transfer to the burner, and can be
interpreted as the energy transferred to the burner per unit reference energy of the mixture.
Figures 2 to 4_are &.raphs of the heat loss L , flame standoff distance ~ = rf - r s, normalized flame
temperature T f = Tf I Tid and heat loss per unit mass as a functions of M. In order to present the
results for the planar arfct cylindrical geometries on the same graph, the standoff distances are
normalized by the laminar flame thickness 8° = A/cpPsSu0, rather than by the burner radius.
Figures 2 and 3 show that the standoff position and the total heat loss rate display a dual response
behavior in that the heat loss has a maximum and the flame standoff position has a minimum.
This behavior has been observed experimentally [5,6] and explained theoretically [7] for the
planar flame.
For the planar case M is bounded by one, at which the flame moves to infinity, the heat loss to
the burner vanishes, and the flame speed is Suo. On the other hand, for the cylindrical flame M
can be increased beyond one due to flow divergence. Consequently, the flame is located at a
finite standoff position even after the heat loss has become vanishingly small. The stabilization
mechanism has therefore changed from heat loss to flow divergence. Comparing the results of
the two cylindrical flames with different burner radii, the flame with the smaller burner is
stabilized closer to the burner because of the larger divergence effect of the smaller burner.
It is also of interest to examine the mass flux through the reaction zone and compare it with the
reference laminar flame value. An expression for this can be obtained by normalizing the mass
flow by a reference mass flow rate based on the reaction zone area, mfo = 21trrPsSuo. The
resulting expression is

(9)
This equation shows that when Tr approaches Tad the mass flux at the reaction zone approaches
the laminar flame value such that the burned velocity Sb is ~ual to Sb0. Consequently, the
unburned velocity Su must exceed the laminar flame speed Su . This effect is due entirely to
flow divergence.

-------

179

Comvutational and Exverimental Studies - Methodolo~
Methane/air/inert mixtures were used in the studies. In the numerical simulation a version of the
Sandia premixed flame code was used, with modifications to ensure strict mass conservation in
the divergent flow field. The kinetic mechanism used was that developed by Egolfopoulos et a1
[8].
The experimental flat flame burner was made of a 5.1 cm diameter porous bronze disk with
20llm pore size and embedded cooling coils. Thermocouples were positioned inside the porous
plug at known distances from the surface to measure the temperature gradient at the burner
surface, from which the heat loss rate can be determined. During the experiments, the burner
surface temperature was held at a constant value by varying the coolant flow rate. The inner and
outer edges of the luminous zone of the flame were measured visually using a microscope. For
detailed comparison, temperature profile through the flame was measured by using both
thermocouples and Laser-Raman Spectroscopy. Experiments with the flat-flame burner were
conducted under normal gravity conditions.
The cylindrical burner was made of a porous bronze tube with 5jlm pore size, 1.25 cm diameter,
and 3.76 cm active length. Due to the small burner size and the limited duration of the
microgravity experiments, no cooling was used for the burner. A thermocouple was inserted
inside the burner wall to record burner temperatures. Experiments were performed under
microgravity conditions at the NASA-Lewis 2.2 second drop tower. Mass fl ow rates were
measured using sonic flow nozzles and pressure transducers to record upstream pressures during
the experiment. A video camera was used to record flame shapes and standoff distances.
Computational and Experimental Studies - Results
For the planar flame, Fig. 5 shows the optically-measured and computed temperature profiles
across a <1>=0.75 methane/air flame with a mass flow rate of 0.015 gm/cm2-s. The comparison is
fairly close, especially for the final temperature. This could imply that radiative heat loss, which
is not included in the numerical calculations, is probably indeed unimportant for the weak flame
investigated. The horizontal shift between the experimental and calculated profiles is about 0.25
mm. Since the flame location and thereby the temperature profIle are fairly sensitive functions of
the surface temperature, this shift could be due to a slight inaccuracy in the measured surface
temperature.
Figure 6 compares the experimental and calculated flame standoff position and burner heat loss
rate. For the numerical calculations the flame location was defined to be the position of
maximum CH radical mole fraction, since this is the major species contributing to the flame
luminosity. It is seen that the calculated flame standoff distance is smaller than the experimental
values, with a correspondingly larger calculated heat loss rate. The overall level of agreement,
however, can be considered to be satisfactory in view of the independent nature with which the
calculation and experiments were conducted.
For the cylindrical flames, mixtures of CH4 + 2(h + 7.52 N2 + 5.665 He, with an effective Lewis
number of 2.2, were used for the experiments; helium was added to enhance flamefront stability
[9]. The adiabatic flame temperature for the unburned mixture temperature of 300 K is 1885 K,
and the calculated laminar burning rate is 17.1 cm/s, or 0.0135 grn/cm2 s.
Figure 7 compares the calculated and measured flame standoff distance as a function of
normalized mass flow M. Since the flames were not strictly cylindrical, the vertical bars of the
experimental data show the range of the flame positions. The numerical results show that there
is no heat loss to the burner at the flow rates shown in the figure. The comparison shows that for

180

high mass flow rates the calculated results are higher than the experimental values. The cause
for this disagreement needs further study.
Summary
Microgravity cylindrical and spherical flames offer well-controlled flame configurations for
fundamental studies of the structure and response of premixed and nonpremixed flames.
Preliminary analytical, computational, and experimental studies demonstrate the viability of this
approach.
ACknowled Wlents
This research was supported by the micro gravity combustion program under NASA sponsorship.
We appreciate the generous technical advice and assistance from K. Sacksteder and D. Dietrich
at NASA-Lewis, and at Princeton University C. J. Sung and J. Liu.
References
1 Law, C. K. (198 8) . Dynamics of Stretched Flames. Twenty-Third Symposium
(International) on Combustion, 1381.
2 Law, C. K. (1982). Recent Advances in Droplet Vaporization and Combustion. Prog.
Energy. Combust. Sci. 8, 169.
3 Choi, M. Y., Dryer, F. L. and Haggard, J. (1 99 1). Observations on a Slow Burning Regime
for Hydrocarbon Droplets: n-heptane/Air Results. Twenty-Third Symposium (International)
on Combustion, 1597.
4 Buckmaster, 1. D. and Ludford, G. S. S. (1 982). Theory of Laminar Flames. Cambridge
Univ. Press, New York.
5 Ferguson , C. R. and Keck, J. C. (1979). Stand-Off Distances on a Flat Flame Burner.
Combust. Flame 34, 85.
6 Spalding, D. B. and Yumlu, V. S. (1959). Experimental Demonstration of the Existence of
Two Flame Speeds. Combust. Flame 3, 553.
7 Chao, B. H. and Law, C. K. (1 988). Duality, Pulsating Instability, and Product Dissociation
in Burner-Stabilized Flames. Combust. Sci. Tech. 62, 211.
8 Egolfopoulos, F . N., Zhu, D. L. and Law, C. K. (1990). Experimental and Numerical
Determination of Laminar Flame Speeds: Mixtures of C2-Hydrocarbons with Oxygen and
Nitrogen. Twenty-Third Symposium (International) on Combustion, 471.
9 Matalon, M. and Matkowsky, B. 1. (1983). Flames in Fluids: Their Interaction and Stability.
Combust. Sci. Tech. 34, 295.

a) Flat Flame Burner

b) Counterflow Burner

c) Cylindrical Burner

Figure 1

181

d) Spherical Burner

15.0

0 .06
cylindrical
...... planar

0.05

.

cyIiadriaI

!?

0.04

,...J

-

_...• pImar

20.0

<l

ff
c:

15.0

0.03

;

~
:x: 0 .02

0

10.0

.,

j

r.=Scm

t::

..,
c:
0

5.0

!!

0.01

(I)

0.00
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

0.5

1.5

1.0

M

Figure 2

Figme3

1.05

0.95

O.IS

~

0.10

11
R.

i

tl
E

0-

"

0.90

f-

"
~

u:

1600

0.20.3

i

7i

0.85

0.05

cylindrical
...... planar

0.80
0.0

.
j

g

1400

G

1200

J

1000

f-

1.5

2.0

800
600

~

400
200
0.00

0.00
1.0

0 .5

2.5

M

flow rate - .DIS gm/em 2 ICC
0.05

0.25
0.20
0.10
0.15
Distance From BUDler, x (em)

4.0
~

}

2.0

3.5

1.8

l \\r
-w~"~ I!
..

3.0

...l

,;
:::l

u:

..

~

2.5

:::l

.

2.0

1.5

"
E

",

..

~.

"

..

i%l

."

II

I ...... experimental

[[

If

1.0
0 .0

0.0050

0.015
0.020
0.010
Flow Rate, m (gm/an 2sec)

0.30

Figure 5

Figure 4

U

"

1800

= 5 cm

1.00

::l

2.5

2000

0.25
r,

If--

2.0

M

14.0

e-

1.6

!.l:

1.4

If

3

I

<l

~

i!

a

i5

-8

1.2

o.so

10.0

B.O

Ii

It:

1.0

12.0

3

(I)

0.60
0.025

II::

..,
0

Vi

6 .0
-

4.0

calculated

I

experimental

2.0
1.5

2.0

2.5
M

3.0

3.5

Figure 7

Figure 6
182

_ _ .J

.-~- ---

.. -

-

---

THE EFFECTS OF GRAVITY ON WRINKLED LAMINAR FLAMES
loW_ Kostiuk, lo Zhou, and RK Cheng
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Energy & Enviro nment Division
Berkeley, California 94720

Introduction
The effects of gravity are significant to the dynamics of idealized unconfined open premixed flames. Moderate to
low turbulence Reynolds number flames, i.e. wrinkled laminar flames, of various unconfined geometries have
been used extensively for investigating fundamental processes of turbulent flame propagation and to validate
theoretical models. Without the wall constraints, the flames are free to expand and interact with surrounding
ambient air. The flowfield in which the flame exists is determined by a coupling of burner geometry, flame
orientation and the gravity field. These complex interactions raise serious questions regarding the validity of
comparing the experimental data of open flames with current theoretical and numerical models that do not include
the effects of gravity nor effects of the larger aerodynamic flowfield. Therefore, studies of wrinkled laminar
flame in microgravity are needed for a better understanding of the role of gravity on flame characteristics such as
flame orientation, mean aerodynamics stretch, flame wrinkle size and buming rate.
To date, most studies of microgravity combustion have concentrated on investigating laminar flames. The
primary diagnostic used is high speed movies of flame luminosity to observe gross flame properties changes. For
example, Durox et a1. [1] reported flame tip motion of rich laminar Bunsen flames under microgravity and
analyzed the motion by a flame instability model. However, the study of premixed turbulent flames under
micro gravity requires more sophisticated diagnostics. But there are also many experimental constraints. The
short duration of micro gravity experiments in drop towers or onboard parabolic flights precludes detailed
statistical investigation of velocity and scalar fluctuations. The lack of a high power laser source prohibits the use
of many established techniques to measure parameters such as flame crossing frequencies and mean scalar length
scales suitable for direct comparison with theoretical models such as the one developed by Bray et a!. [2].
Our approach to characterize and quantify turbulent flame structures under microgravity is to exploit qualitative
and quantitative flow visualization techniques coupled with video recording and computer controlled image
analysis technologies. The experiments will be carried out in the 2.2 second drop tower at the NASA Lewis
Research Center. The longest time scales of typical wrinkled laminar flames in the geometries considered here are
in the order of 10 msec. Hence, the duration of the drop is sufficient to obtain the amount of statistical data
necessary for characterize turbulent flame structures.
Diagnostics and apparatus
Schlieren visualization was widely used in early studies of premixed turbulent combustion. Because it is a line-ofsight technique, it has been superseded by laser planar imaging techniques in recent years. Schlieren 's most
appealing aspects for microgravity work are that it require relatively low power light source, the optics are
relatively simple and it is easy to align. When using a laser source coupled with modem CCD cameras with high
shutter speeds (up to 1110000 sec), new video recording and analysis technologIes, laser schlieren can provide
qualitative information of the flame flowfield and quantitative information such as flame angles and perhaps flame
wrinkle size.
The schlieren system developed for our microgravity experiments uses a 0.5 mW He-Ne laser light source and
two 75 rom diameter schlieren lenses. The lenses' diameter is also the effective field-of-view of the system. Due
to the constraints of the drop package size, the two lenses are of different focal length. The transmitting lens has
This work is supported by NASA Microgravity Sciences and Applications Division. Technical support is
provided by NASA Lewis Research Center under contract No. C-32000-R. Project Scientist is Dr. Karen 1.
Weiland.

183

a relatively short focal length of 300 mm and the converging lens has a focal length of 1000 mm to maintain a
sensitive system. An opaque spot etched on a glass window is used as the schlieren stop. This arrangement
produces a reverse field image (i.e., dark background), and regions of high density gradients appear bright.
A CCD camera and video recorder are used to record the schlieren images with the shutter speed varied from 1/60
to 1/10000 sec. The system has an effective framing rate of 60 Hz even though standard play-back speed is 30
Hz. Each frame is made up of two interlaced fields (i.e., separate images) recorded 1/60 sec. apart. Individual
fields can be displayed on the S-VHS deck during freeze-frame operation or the images can be digitize4,d the
fields separated using a computer controlled image processing system. The digitized images can be sto~d
analyzed by standard image processing software.
,_ .' .
A conical Bunsen type burner is used for the first set of experiments. The burner is made of aluminum and has a
25 mm diameter outlet supplied by a converging nozzle mounted on a cylindrical settling chamber. The
converging nozzle is designed to produced laminar flows with uniform velocity distribution across the exit. The
flame is stabilized by a ring fitted to the exit of the burner to enable stabilization of lean flames. Turbulence is
generated by a perforated plate placed 20 mm upstream of the exit. The laser, optics, burner, flow control and
supply systems, and onboard computer are mounted inside a standard 3' x 3' x loS' drop package frame for the
NASA Lewis Research Center 2.2 second drop tower (Fig. 1).
Nonnal gravity studies
As a necessary prerequisite to the micro gravity experiments, we have conducted a parametric study to determine
the mixture and flow conditions at which the effects of gravity on flame characteristics are most prominent.
Schlieren images of laminar and turbulent conical flames subjected to + g (upwards) and -g (downward) forces are
compared. In addition to schlieren visualization, selected flames are investigated in detail by the use of twocomponent laser Doppler anemometry (LDA) to determine the coupling between the flowfield (encompassing the
reactants, flame, and surrounding gases) and the flame characteristics.
Figure 2 shows a typical schlieren image of a + g laminar conical flame. The flame is shown by the triangular
silhouette above the burner exit. In addition , the interfaces formed between the hot products and the ambient air
are also visible. This product/air interface is unstable and is characterized by the formation of bulges reminiscent
of the roll-up of torroidal vortices. A comparison of two time sequences of + g and -g schlieren images of a
laminar methane/air flame (~ = 0.6 and incident flow velocity U ::= 0.7 mls) is shown in Fig. 3. The
development of the roll-up vortex like structure in the unstable product/air shear interface is apparent. The video
also shows that the flame tip moves up and down synchronously with this shear layer disturbance. Subjecting the
flame to -g changes the flame shape and turns the product/air interface into a stable envelope of hot gases, so the
flame is much more stable than in the + g case.
The flame tip motion being fully synchronous with the unsteady product/air interface is also observed in the +g
turbulent cases. Figure 4 shows a typical sequence. The flame wrinkles are either stretched larger or compressed
smaller during the cycle. This implies a direct flowfield effect on the turbulent burning rate.
Durox et al. [1] also reported and analyzed flame tip motion in their rich laminar flames under normal and
microgravity. By only observing flame luminosity, they were not aware of the significance of the product/air
interface. The flame tip motion in their study was attributed to flame instability developed at the burner rim. To
estimate if their results are consistent with the present data, the schlieren videos are analyzed to determine the
fluctuation frequencies of the product/air interface. The width of the product/air interface silhouette at the mean
height of the flame tip are determined for 60 fields (1 sec total time). The results are fitted with a cubic spline
and analyze by Fast-Fourier-Transform. All flames show primary fluctuation frequencies between 8 to 13 Hz
(Fig. 5). These frequencies are about the same as those reported by Durox et al. Therefore, it seems that the
flame tip motion observed by Durox et al. are also induced by the instability of the product/air interface.
The unstable product/air interface also induces flow fluctuations in the approach flow. The velocity spectra
obtained at the centerline about 4 rnm upstream of a laminar flame tip clearly show a dominant fluctuation
frequency (Fig. 6) and higher harmonics of this primary frequency also exist. This is a strong evidence of the
coupling between the flowfield and flame front dynamics. Velocity spectra obtained in a turbulent flame also

184

show the dominant fluctuation frequency (Fig. 7) though the relative energy containing in this frequency is
diminished by the turbulent kinetic energy associated with the grid turbulence. This observation strongly suggests
that the unstable product/air interface has a significant influence on flame propagation and is the avenue through
which gravity affects turbulent flame characteristics. These results have been presented at the poster session of
the 24th International Combustion Symposium [3].

Planned activities and diagnostic development
The microgravity work will be carried out at NASA Lewis Research Center in September, 1992. The experiments
will be concentrated on methane/air laminar and turbulent flames with equivalent ratio from 0.5 to 1.0 and mean
flow exit velocity from 0.5 to 1.0 m/s. These are the conditions found to be most affected by the change in the
direction of the gravitation forces. Schlieren will be the primary diagnostic and the results will be analyzed as
outlined above to obtain the changes in the flame shape, and the fluctuation frequencies of the flame tip and of the
product/air interface. The videos will also provide qualitative information on the changes in the flame wrinkle
sizes.
The second phase of the microgravity experiments will involve the use of other flame configurations such as rodstabilized v-flames. The development of quantitative diagnostics for measuring flame wrinkle characteristics is
also planned. The single beam schlieren technique will be exploited for measuring the flame crossing frequencies
at a point. The deflection of a He-Ne laser beam traversing the flame zone can be quantified by the use of a
diode. Fast Fourier transform of the diode output will produce a spectrum of the flame crossing frequency that is
directly related to the flame wrinkle sizes. Refinement of the technique will rely on comparing the results with
those obtained from the Mie scattering from oil droplet method that is normally used in laboratory experiments.
The comparison will also help to establish the proper data interpretation method .

References
1.

Durox, D., Baillot, B., Scoufflaire, P. and Prud'homme, R. "Some Effects of Gravity on the Behavior of
Premixed Flames", Combustion and Flame, Vol. 82, 1990, p. 66.

2.

Bray, K.N.C., Libby, P.A., and Moss, J.B., "Unified Modeling Approach for Premixed Turbulent
Combustion - Part I: General Formulation", Combustion and Flame, Vol. 61,1985, p. 87.

3.

Kostiuk, L. W., Zhou, L. and Cheng, R. K., "The Effects of Gravity on Wrinkled Lamianr Flames", Poster
paper 102, 24th Intemation
5- I I Sydney. Au ~ ~ral i;l 1992.

Figure 1: Photograph of Drop Package.
185

- -- . -

---

Figure 2: Typical Schlieren Image of Premixed Laminar Bunsen Flame.

+g

-g

t=O.O

t=0.0167

t=0.0333

Figure 3: Time Sequence of Schlieren Images for Laminar Flame.

186

t=0.05

L

+g

t=O.0167

t=O.O

t=O.0333

t=O.05

Figure 4:Time Sequence of Schlieren Images for Turbulent Flame.

X

X

1

2

1.0~----------------------------------~

0.8

_0.6
()

Q)
CJ)

...........
Q)

E
+='

0.4

0.2

o.o~------~--------~------~~------~

-80

-40

o

40

Position of shear laver (mm)
Figure5: Radial Position of AirlProduct Interface.

187

80

1eor-----------------------------.

>-

e>
(1)

c

w1e4
(1)
()

c

~

::J

... 1e3

.0
::J
r-

1e2
1e-1

1eO

1e1

1e2

1e3

Frequency (Hz)
Figure:6 Velocity Spectra of Laminar Rarne.

1e9.-----------------------------.

1e5~----~------~----~------~

1e-1

1eO

1e1
1e2
Frequency (Hz)

1e3

Figure7: Velocity Spectra of Turbulent Flame.
188

MICROGRAVITY COMBUSTION OF DUST SUSPENSIONS
John H.S. Lee, Olivier Peraldi, and Rom Knystautas
Department of Mechanical Engineering
McGill University
Montreal, Canada

Introduction
Unlike the combustion of homogeneous gas mixtures, there are practically no reliable
fundamental data (Le., laminar burning velocity, flammability limits, quenching distance,
minimum ignition energy) for the combustion of heterogeneous dust suspensions. Even
the equilibrium thermodynamic data such as the constant pressure volume combustion
pressure and the constant pressure adiabatic flame temperature are not accurately known
for dust mixtures. This is mainly due to the problem of gravity sedimentation. In
normal gravity, turbulence, convective flow, electric and acoustic fields are required to
maintain a dust in suspension. These external influences have a dominating effect on
the combustion processes. Microgravity offers a unique environment where a quiescent
dust cloud can in principle be maintained for a sufficiently long duration for almost
all combustion experiments (dust suspensions are inherently unstable due to Brownian
motion and particle aggregation) . . Thus, the microgravity duration provided by drop
towers, parabolic flights, and the space shuttle, can all be exploited for different kinds
of dust combustion experiments. The present paper describes some recent st udies on
microgravity combustion of dust suspension carried out on the KC-135 and the Caravelle
aircraft. The results reported are obtained from three parabolic flight campaigns; NASA
KC-135 (March and July 1992) and ESA Caravelle (April 1992).

General Considerations
Pioneering studies of microgravity combustion of lycopodium dust clouds have been
carried out by Berlad, Ross and co-workers at NASA LeRC [1,21. Acoustic waves from
a speaker at one end of a 5 em x 30 em flame tube was used to lift a uniform layer of
dust initially placed along the horizontal tube. An inflatable balloon at the other end of
the tube maintains more or less constant pressure combustion. Chattering or pulsating
flames were observed which were credited to the non-uniform stratified distribution of
the dust by the acoustic field [3]. However, vibrating flames are typical for flame propagation in tubes due to flame-pressure wave interactions. Laminar burning velocities

189

were deduced based on an estimate of the complex flame shapes. Adhesion of the dust
to the tube wall was found to be a problem.
Although the laminar burning velocity and the temperature profile in the reaction
zone provide more important information on the flame propagation mechanism, we consider it important to first obtain some thermodynamic data on dust combustion in microgravity. The standard combustion experiment for dust suspension is constant volume
burning where the peak pressure and the maximum rate of pressure rise are determined.
Standard apparatus and procedures have been developed (e.g., the Hartmann bomb,
the spherical 20 liter bomb of Siwert, the 1 m 3 vessel of Bartknecht) by the dust explosion community. In all these apparatus, a given sample of dust is first dispersed by a
strong turbulent jet and the subsequent suspension is then introduced into the partially
evacuated combustion chamber. A key parameter is the so-called dispersion turbulence
which decays rapidly with time. However, in normal gravity, dust sedimentation occurs
when the dispersion turbulence decays and it is necessary to carry out the burning at
a high level of turbulence in the dust suspension. Strong turbulence tends to stratify
the dust in the eddies beside having a quenching effect on the combustion processes
(especially for the slower burning rates of heterogeneous dust mixtures). Furthermore,
turbulence also strongly influences the transport and hence burning rate. Therefore,
the rate of pressure rise is strongly influenced by the dispersion turbulence and perhaps
more so than by the chemical and physical properties of the dust cloud itself. Thus far,
it has not been possible to obtain accurate data even on the thermodynamic combustion
parameters for dust suspensions. In microgravity, where sedimentation is absent, it is
then possible to wait till the dispersion turbulence has decayed prior to ignition. In this
manner, more fundamental information can be obtained that is characteristic of the dust
cloud and not the apparatus and procedure. We judge that this is an appropriate first
step towards the understanding of dust cloud combustion.
Apparatus
Experiments were carried out during the nominal 20 see duration of j.lg of parabolic
flights of the NASA KC-13S and ESA's Caravelle. The spherical combustion chamber
used is 5.4 liters in volume ("'-' 20 em diameter) and is essentially a 1/ 4-scaled down
version of the standard 20 liter spherical bomb of Siwert [4]. The dust sample is placed
inside a small cylindrical dust cup which is connected to a small pressure vessel of
about 0.2 liter in volume via an electrically operated solenoid valve. When the valve
is activated , the high pressure air from the 0.2 liter chamber discharges into the dust
cup and disperses the dust sample. The resulting dust suspension then flows into the
spherical combustion chamber through numerous small jets ("'-' 1 mm diameter) spaced
about 1 em apart around the inner radius of a tubular ring inside the spherical vessel.
The spherical vessel is initially evacuated to some sub-atmospheric pressure so that after
the dust dispersion , the final pressure in the chamber is atmospheric. Ignition is via a
small pyroelectric match-head and the time delay between dispersion (activation of the

190

)solenoid valve) and ignition is controlled by a time delay generator. A schematic of
the apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. To carry out the experiments on board the KC135, a self-contained system comprising the vacuum and compressed gas supply, data
acquisition system and the various electrical equipment, and control valves is required.
This system is shown schematically in Fig. 2. The dust used is aluminum and two mean
particle sizes are used (AMPAL 637 (d 32 = 5 j.Lm) and AMPAL 615 (d 32 = 20j.Lm).
Electron micrograph analysis of these dusts indicate a far from spherical morphology.
Instead, the geometries of the particles are highly irregular. Two pressure transducers
(PCB 113A24) with heat shields are used as the main diagnostics and a matrix of light
absorption probes are used to monitor the dust concentration inside the vessel. The
concentration-time measurements are taken without combustion in the vessel. After
each experiment, the burnt products are evacuated to outside the aircraft and the bomb
is opened to clean the residual deposits.
Results and Discussion
Figure 3 compares the pressure-time curves (for the 5 j.Lm dust) for both the normal
and j.Lg experiments. For short delay times (i.e., 0.2 m / s), the normal and j.Lg results
are practically identical, indicating that the dispersion turbulence dominates t he early
time combustion processes inside the chamber. As the turbulence decays both the peak
overpressure as well as the rate of the pressure rise decreases for the normal gravity
experiments . The decrease in peak overpressure with delay t ime for the initial period
can be credited to both turbulent quenching and wall deposits as the dust jets impact on
the wall. It should be noted that the duration of the dispersion process (i.e., pressurized
air discharging from the 0.2 liter vessel) is about 500 ms. Thus, the turbulence level is
still fairly intense for the first few seconds after the start of the dispersion process. The
slower decrease of the peak pressure (as well as the rate of pressure rise) for the longer
delays of 10 sec and 15 sec could be due to gravity sedimentation. For the m icrogravity case, we note that the pressure-time profile appears to reach an asymptotic limit
without the gravity sedimentation. The rate of pressure rise remains the same for different delay times, indicating that the influence of the dispersion turbulence is essentially
negligible after about the first 5 sec. For both the normal and the j.Lg experiments, the
optimum peak overpressures (corresponding to a time delay of 200 ms) is about 6.2 atm.
as compared to the theoretically computed constant volume explosion overpressure for
aluminum of 11.6 atm. Incomplete voiding of the dust from the dust dispersion system
into the vessel, adhesion of the dust to the wall, as well as heat losses and quenching as the flame reaches the copper wall of the spherical vessel could account for this.
From the microgravity gravity results, an asymptotic value of the peak overpressure of
about 4 atm is obtained, corresponding to only about 10% of the dust that is actually
burnt in terms of energetics. Hence, instead of the global nominal dust concentration, of
500 gm/m 3 based on the total account of dust divided by the volume of the bomb , only
about 10% remains in suspension after the dynamic process has subsided. The actual
amount of dust may be higher since heat losses to the wall and the dispersion ring may
191

be significant. Assuming a thin spherical flame, one can also deduce the laminar burning
velocity from the pressure-time curve [5]. The laminar burning velocity corresponding
to the asymptotic pressure-time history from the microgravity experiment is found to be
about 0.25 ms based on the peak overpressure of 4 atm observed experimentally. This
is quite a reasonable value.
The peak overpressure versus time delays for the 5 J.Lm and 20 J.Lm dusts are shown
in Fig. 4. The continuous decrease in the peak overpressure with time in normal gravity
after the dynamic dispersion processes have subsided can be attributed to gravity sedimentation. The microgravity results show an asymptotic limit of about 4 bars after a
delay time of about 5 sec where most of the initial dispersion turbulence processes have
decayed. However, for the large particle size case, both the microgravity and normal
gravity experiments are similar, i.e., the initial dynamic processes completely control
the combustion. An optimum peak overpressure (at 200 ms delay) of only 4 bars (as
compared to 7 bars for the 5 J-Lm dust) indicating that substantial amounts of dust
are not discharged from the dispersion ring. When dispersed, the larger particles also
do not follow the recirculation turbulent flow and hence more losses to the wall occur
due to particle impact result. For large particles, the standard method of dispersion is
not suitable and perhaps the simpler (but perhaps less uniform) method as used in the
Hartmann bomb may give better results.

Conclusion
The preliminary experiments so far have demonstrated the feasibility of obtaining
a quiescent dust cloud for fundamental flame propagation studies in microgravity. The
major problem that has been identified is the initial generation of the dust suspension
and its introduction into the combustion chamber. Higher shear rates from an intense
turbulent jet is found necessary to break up an agglomerated dust sample, yet a low
velocity laminar flow is needed to introduce the suspension into the combustion chamber
to avoid turbulent stratification and high speed impact and subsequent adhesion of the
dust to the chamber wall. These are technical problems that can best be resolved by more
manned experiments on the KC-135 (or equivalent). Once the dust dispersion problem
has been resolved, fundamental experiments on flame propagation, structure, quenching
distance and flammability limits, minimum ignition energy can readily be designed.
Theoretical modelling is considered to be of vital importance in design of the experiments
due to the large number of variables involved in dust combustion. The limited diagnostic
that can be effectively used for optically thick dust flame in the restricted space lab
environment also necessitates the use of theoretical models for interpretation of the
experimental results obtained.

Acknow ledgemen t
This work is supported by the Canadian Space Agency through contract #9F007-1-

192

---------~ .

-_. -

~--

I

I
8022/01-SW. Technical assistance by Champlain Landry, Pedro Gregorio, Debbie Soriano are gratefully acknowledged.
References

1. Berlad, A.L., "Combustion of Particle Clouds in Combustion Experiments in a

Zero Gravity Laboratory", Ed. T .R. Cochran, AIAA Progress in Astronautics
and Aeronautics, Vol. 73 (1981), p. 91.
2. Berlad, A.L. and Tangirala, V., "Reduced Gravity Combustion of Particle Cloud",
NASA CR Rept. 182299 (1989).
3. Ross, H., Facca, L, Berlad, A., Tangirala, V., "Feasibility of Reduced Gravity
Experiments involving Quiescent Uniform Particle Cloud Combustion", NASA
Tech. Memo 101371 (1989).
4. Bartknecht, W., "Explosions" , Springer-Verlag, N.Y. (1980).
5. Lee, J .R.S., Pu, Yi-Kang and Knystautas, R., "Influence of Turbulence on Closed
Volume Explosion of Dust-Air Mixtures", Archivum combustionis, Vol. 7, No. 3/4
(1987) pp. 280-297.

193

Flushing & Cleaning

COfllll'essed

Vacuum Pump

f,Jo Bottle

Overboard Vent

Figure 1 : Schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus.

Constant VolJme
Experineri

Delay generators,
Trigger module , ...:-==:::::::=tt~~rlh~~~~
Computer

DI
Vacuum

46'

Figure 2 : Microgravity Experimental Package.
194

I
I

7
L. __ .... _ .... _

----0-- DoIoj>.O.2a(1 0)

--,
--'"1-- --,,-- .... -- --,--,-- --,--,--..
.. .. .... .... .. .. .... f ..
.. .. ....

--;-. .. -:- .. -:- .. .... -;- .. .;- --;- .. -: . .
_ .. "_a"' __ "' ____

....

.

~....

~

~

~

~

.... ....... ..
~

. , , .
--,---,--"'--'"1--

6

~-..

--"1--"'--"'--"-.... .. .. .. ..
• • •

~-

•• 4

~-

I

~-

~-

_ _ Ja _ 4. _ ... _

.... ..... - ....... ,._ ..
~-

5

....

~-

.. " .... " ... ,...

--¢--DoIoj>.6.(10)

.. .. 1 " " ' " ' '

.... ~ .... ~ .... ~ .... !.... .. .. ! .... t ....

~DoIoj>.10'(10)

.
-- ....... -- .. -- ...--

-fr-DoIoj>.16.(10)

- -...
t---

DoIoj>.O.2a 10 0)

w
a:

--4.>---

DoIoj>. h 10 0)

m3

- -••>---

DoIoj>. 10.100)

E

.... r" -,. .. -,-

!!.4
:;,

a:

11.

- -.....- - DoIoj>. 16.100)

2

- - -,---,--,\- -'"1-- --.,--,,-- .,--,-- -:- - ~- -;- - -: -,

I

••

,

••

-

o
o

50

100

150

I

-

200

350

300

250

400

TIME (ms)

Figure 3 Pressure rises for different delay times between dispersion
and ignition in I-g and /J.-g.

8
• • •

,

,

,

- -r - -,- - .,." .,. -

,

,

,. - -r - -,- - -,- _~--~--:---:--

7

•

I

,

,

- - .,. - ', - -,- -; - -

- -,- - - ,- " -,- - -,- -

- - ,,- -, - -

- - .,. - -,- - -, - - .. - ,

- -,. - -,. - -.- - - , - -

- - ,,- - '\- - , - - , - -

1 - - 1 - -

...

__ , __ , __ , __ , __ __ , __ , __ .___,____ ~--~- - ~--; -,
,
, ,

- -,-__-.,-__-, - - ._-_ ..
.. __ , --

6

.

- - " - -,- - -,-" -,- -

- - -,- - -,- - -, - -T- -

o

"mpoI637 (I 0)

·

,

,

•

Ampol637 (OO)

o

Ampol61S (10)

,

- - r - -,. - -r - -.--

..
. .
.
.
--\- -"_."--'-,
· , , .

-

-

.

--"--"._"-.'-- -... -- . - -- -- --.. - _. - _
,
,
,
--r
- -,, - - . ,. - -'1- - , -- --,--,.--.---,-• Ampol6IS(OO)
--\--"--" .. '-.
,
,
, ,
,
,
--"--"'--'1-'".-- - -, - -r· -r - · r · --,- - ,- .,- -, -- --; --; --~
, ,
,
, , ,
-- __ " __
- -"--"'--'1 -- '.-- - -, - - r - -r - -'-. -- . . • • ". . - -'1-- .. -- --'--r--,---,-----.,--.,-- . -- . -·
J._ __
._oJ
__ "

__ J __ J __ '

__

__ " _ _ " __ J __ '

5

__ " __ J __

,

,

,

__

~

~

- -"'1- - '\- -'I - -'I - -

- -, - -,

- - ... _ - .. - - J __

_ _" __ "

~

_ _

J __

.

__ J _ _ .. __ J __ , _

,

4

,

,

__ ..

--~ --~ --~ --:- --

_.,

-~-- ~-. ~--

-- . -- . --r---r---· . . -- . -· . --.. ..
---~--~--~-.:----.~--~--~--~

:::::::::.::~:::: .. :~:: ~::!::

3

;::::::::::;:: -. -; ---; -- .. -.
--• ...-; --- -:.. -----.--- - -- --f -

- ;!---... --_._--

2

- - .. - - .. - -,-

r - -,. - -,- - -,- - - - '"1- - '\- - , - - 1 - - - - r - -r - -r
__ ~--~--~--:-- __ , __ , __ , __ , ____ , __ , __ ._

- -

- '---:- --:- --:--

~

~

.

--,---,- --,---,--

......-- . -- .. -.. --

.

~

--,---,- --,-.... _.o- •• --"\--'--T-·T·-

-;-. -:- --; --{- -~ .- --.;. --;. --;- - -;- --- --.. --;-- -.;.. --~ -- _.O' - -_ - - - - ... - - .... -..
_~

. _;---:---:---:--

--. -- .. -- ... -----;---:---:._-;--

, , , ,
,
, ,
---,---,-- ,.",_. ----_ ......... _... -- t··-'---'---'--

--,---,---,.-.,.. _.

~-

- ~ •• " - .. T--

•
••
- - f -.'- •• ,_ •• t,.-

k.

o

..... _ ....... -......
. _· -.. -..... .. "\--'\--, .. ,_ .
....... , ,

-..... -'--_._:~::~:rr

o

2500

.

•• r· -,. -·r - -,-.

7500

10000

12500

17500

20000

Delay (rna)

Figure 4 Variation of peak constant volume explosion pressure with delay time
between dispersion and ignition in I-g and /J.-g.
195

THE STRUCTURE OF PARTICLE CLOU D PREMIXED FLAMES
K. Seshadri
Department of Applied Mechanics and Engineering Sciences
University of California - San Diego
La Jolla, California 92093

1. Introductjon .

The aim of this study is to provide a numerical and asymptotic
description of the structure of planar laminar flames, propagating in a
medium containing a uniform cloud of fuel-particles premixed with air.
Attention is restricted here to systems where the fuel-particles first vaporize
to form a known gaseous fuel, which is then oxidized in the gas-phase. This
program is supported for the period September 14, 1991 to September 13, 1992.
Some results of the study is shown in Ref. 1. The work summarized in Ref. 1
was initiated prior to September 14, 1991 and was completed on February 1992.
Research performed in addition to that described in Ref. 1 in collaboration
with Professor A. Linan. is summarized here.
The mode l developed here is built on previous asymptotic analysis
structure of premixed particle-cloud flames [1].
In this previous analysis the
vaporization rate of the fuel-particles was presumed to be proportional to
T s 1.33, where Ts is the temperature of the fuel-particles. Hence, the activation
temperature in an Arrhenius-type rate law for the vaporization process is not
large. For simpl icity . the temperature of the fuel-particles was presumed to be
equal to the gas temperature. The analysis was performed for values of <I> u > 1.0.
where

<I>

particles.

u is the equivalence ratio based on the gaseous fuel available in the
For given values of

<I>

u the analysis yields results for the burning

velocity and $ g. where $ g is the effective equivalence ratio in the reaction
zone [1].

The analysis shows that even though

calculated value of

<I> g

<I>

u > 1.0. for certain cases the

is less than unity.

A two-temperature model is described here. where the temperature of
the fuel-particles is different from the temperature of the gas.
However the
size of the fuel-particle is assumed to be small enough so that its velocity is
nearly equal to the gas velocity.
A general treatment of flame propagation
supported by volatile fuel-particles should consider both radiative and
molecular transport mechanisms. the temperature difference and the
differences in velocity between the gas and the particulates, the
nonadiabaticity of combustible systems of finite size. as well as the detailed
kinetics of oxidation and the kinetics of vaporization pyrolysis.
This work has
the somewhat limited aim of examining the interplay of vaporization kinetic
and oxidative kinetic processes for cases where nonadiabatic and radiative
transport mechanisms are not substantial.

197

Preceding Page tslan"

2. Form ulatio n.
, planar flame
A model is develo ped to descri be steady , one-di mensi onal
distrib uted fuelmly
propag ation in a combu stible mixtur e consis ting of unifor
initial numbe r densit y of the particl es, nu (numb e r of
The
particl es in air.
presum ed to be known .
particl es per unit volum e) and the initial radius au are
are assum ed to be
All e xterna l forces includ ing gravit ationa l forces effects
of a fuel-p article is repres ented by
The kinetic s of vapori zation
neglig ible .
the expres sion

2
rh=41 ta Aexp (-

~:)=-r1t~) Ph

(1)

per unit time from the
where rh repres ents the mass of gaseou s fuel vapori zed
density respec tively of
fuel-p article , a and P s are the instan taneou s radius and
respec tiv ely re presen t
a fuel- particl e. The rate param eters A and T a v which
temp eratur e of the vapor iz ation
th e freque ncy factor and the activa tion
presumed to be a large
proces s are presum ed to be known . The ratio T av/ T s is
quant ity .
The
sphere .
Consi der a vaporizin g fu el-par ticle in an am bient atmo
zing fro m the
vapori
balanc e equati on for the mass fractio n of the gaseou s fuel
the energy balanc e equati on can be written as,
fuel-p article YF, and
(2)

(3)

For the gas mixtu re k is the th ermal
where r is the radial coordi nate.
. The quanti ty LF =
condu ctivity , c p the heat capaci ty , and T the tempe rature
presum ed to be a
k/(p cpD F) is the Lewis numbe r of the gaseou s fuel which is
Bound ary
s fuel.
consta nt and DF is the diffusi on coeffi cient of the gaseou
fuel- particl e . and at the
condit ions for Eqs. 2 and 3 far from the surfac e of the
surfac e of the fuel-pa rt icle can be writte n as.

T = Too. YF = Y F.oo as r ~oo ,
2 aYF at r=a.
T = Ts m(1_Y F) = _ 4 1tkr
cp LF ar
•

(4)

n of the
The values of Too and YF,- will be determ ined from the solutio
The tempe rature of
equati ons govern ing the structu re of the lamina r flame.
balanc e equati on
the fuel-p article T s can be calcul ated from the energy

198

-~--~ --- -- ---. ----

(5)

where t represents the time, Cs represents the heat capacity of fuel-particle,
and Lv represents the heat required to vaporize unit mass of vapor from a fueJparticle. The values of cp and Cs are presumed to be constant. If the value of k
is also presumed to be constant, then from integration of Eqs. 2 and 3, using Eq.
4 to determine the constants of integration, the profiles of YF and T can be
expressed as
(6)

and
(7)

Introducing

the

definition.

A=(41t k r )r = a'
rTICp

(8)

from Eqs. 5 and 7 it follows that

41takA(Too- T s)

exp (A) - 1

=

41takLvA 4
dTs
c
+ -3 1t a3 Ps Cs dT .

(9)

p

The term on the left side of Eq. 9 denotes the rate of heat transfer from
the gas to the fuel-particle, with the effective Nusselt's number denoted by
A/{exp <A) - IJ. The first tenn following the equality sign on the right side of
Eq. 9 denotes the latent heat required to vaporize the fuel-particle. and the
second term denotes the sensible heat required to raise the temperature of the
fuel-particle. It follows fro m Eqs. 1. and 8 that
(10)

Let Tv denote a characteristic value of the temperature of the fuelparticle for which the value of A evaluated from Eq. 10 is of order unity. For T s
< Tv, the vaporization rate and consequently the value of A, is exponentially
small. In the limit of small values of A, A/[exp(A) - 1] = 1. Hence the first term
on the right side of Eq. 9 can be neglected in calculating the value of Ts. For Ts
= Tv, A is of order unity. If the value of T s is allowed to increase beyond Tv,
then the value of A would become exponentially large and the term on the left
side of Eq. 9 would become exponentially small, consequently the rate of heat
transfer from the gas-phase to the solid, will be small. Therefore, for values of
T s beyond Tv, the value of the derivative dT sldt will be negligibly small, so that
the value of A remains of order unity. For simplicity, it is presumed that rTI = 0
199

- --

for Ts < Tv and the value of Ts does not increase after it attains the value Tv .
The gove rning equations fo r the structure of the fl ame can be w ritten
as ,
Y

= Puuu +

t

1t Ps Du U u

d(Y YF) _ ~ d 2YF =
dx

Cp LF

(~ - a3~

DuPuUu

dx 2

Y

rh _ WF

(11)
Pu

P,

d(YY~}

(13)

dx

d(Y cp T) _k
dx

u

(12)

f l = DuPuUu qp
-y
-

dx 2

pu

+ <2R WF-.
p

(1 4)

Here the subscript u denotes conditions in the ambient reactant stream.
The subscript 00 has been dropped
in Eqs. 12-14.
The quantities WF
gaseous fuel and oxygen per unit
mass of gaseous fuel consumed.
spatial coo rdin ate x' as,

from the quantities YF , Y02 and T appearing
and wo 2 denote the rate of consumption of
volume. and QR is the heat released per unit
The independent variable x is related to the

X =

f(;}x·.

(1 5)

In the regions where T s < Tv. the vaporization rates are assumed to be
negligibly small hence the radius of the fuel-panicle does not change and its
temperature T s and the quantity qp can be calculated from the relations .

(16)
and

(17)

When the value of the temperature of the fuel-particle reaches Tv , they
begin to vaporize and the increase in their temperature is negligibly small.
The radius of the fuel-partic le and the quantity qp can be calculated from the
expressi o ns.

a

~ = - Tu ~~: Y[T -Tv + (Tv -~) In (1 + CrAT~ Tv))] ,

(18)

and.
3

qp

= rh(c- - T) m= _Ps 1.1t.Y.. d{a ) .
-"
3 Pu dx
J.Jy,

(19)

200
I

.J

In deducing the system of equations 12-19 the product p k was presumed
to be a constant.
The chemical reaction between the gaseous fuel and the
oxidizer is presumed to occur by a one-step process.
The system of equations
12-19 were solved numerically.
3. Results
For purpose of illustration calculations were performed assuming that
the gaseous fuel that evolves from the fuel-particle is methane.
The chemical
kinetic rate parameters characterizing the gas-phase oxidation were chosen
such that the burning velocity for stoichiometric mixture of gaseous methane
and air is 37 cm/s.
The values of some of the parameters used in the
calculations are ku = 0.00035 cal/(cm s K), p u = 0.001135 g/cm 3 , p s = l.0 g/cm 3 ,
Tu
300 K, Tv = 600 K, Lv/QR = 0.0l. Results of some of these calculations for
values of au equal to 0.0007 cm, 0.0010 em, and 0.0015 cm are shown in Figs. 1
Figure I shows the the burning velocity uu, as a function of the
and 2.
equi valence ratio cj> u, calculated based on the gaseous fuel available in the fuelparticles. Figure 1 shows that steady flame propagation is possible in fuel-rich
combustible mixtures. In Fig. 2 the structure of the flame is plotted at a value
of cj> u = 1.89 and au = 0.00 to cm.
The various non-dimensional quantities
appearing in this figure are defined as,

=

(20)

where Tb is the adiabatic flame temperature .
Interpretations of results similar
to those shown in Fig. I and 2 are currently in progress.
4. Future

Research.

Future research is directed toward performing numerical
using the system of equations 12-18 over a wide parametric range.
description of the flame structure will also be attempted.

calculations
Asymptotic

5. References.
I). Seshadri, K., Berlad·, A. L .• and Tangirala, Y., The Structure of Particle-Cloud
Flames, Combustion and Flame 89: 333-342 (1992)

201

--_._-

--

--

24
.--.
UJ
..........

-i>
~
::l

au=7~m)

22

S
u

al

::s

10

18

u

0

16

'oJ)

14

.5

E
::l

15

12

o:l

10
1.0

1.4

2.2

1.8

Equivalence Ratio ,

2.6
<l>

3.0

u

Figure 1. The burning velocity u u (cm/s) as a function of the equivalence
ratio

~

u

, for various values for the initial radius of the fuel-partical a u .

1.2
El

'f

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
4

6

8

10

14

12

16

18

z
Figure 2 . The structure of the flame for

202

~

u

= 1.89

and a u

= 0.0010

cm .

1r

COMBUSTION SYNTHESIS OF CERAMIC AND METAL-MATRIX
COMPOSITES
John J. Moore, Heng J. Feng, and Kevin J. Hunter
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, Colorado 80401
and
David G. Wirth
Coors Ceramics Company
Golden, Colorado 80401

Introduction
Combustion synthesis or self-propagating high temperature synthesis (SHS) is effected by heating a reactant mixture,
to above the ignition temperature (Tig) whereupon an exothermic reaction is initiated which produces a maximum or
combustion temperature, Tc. These SHS reactions are being used to produce ceramics, intermetallics, and composite
materials.' One of the major limitations of this process is that relatively high levels of porosity, e.g. , 50%, remain in the
product. Conducting these SHS reactions under adiabatic conditions, the maximum temperature is the adiabatic
temperature, Tad, and 6H (Tad) = 0, Tad = Tc. If the reactants or products go through a phase change, the latent
heat of transformation needs to be taken into account,
Ttrdns

i.e.

t.H (Tad)

= tlH (To)

T

f

Tdd

CpdT ± tlH (trans ) +

T.)

f

Cpdt

=

0

(6)

Ttrans

where To is the initial or starting temperature, ego 298 K. Ttrans is the phase transition point of a reactant -6H(trans)
or a product +6H(trans) and 6H(trans) is the corresponding heat of transformation. Tad can be determined from
equation (6) or graphically as indicated in Figure 1.

Experimental Reaction Systems
Several model composite systems have been investigated in which an excess amount of AI is used both as a reductant
in the reaction and as the metal component of the ceramic-metal composite.3-6

i.e.

3Ti0 2 + 3C + (4 +x)AI = 3TiC + 2A1 203 + xAl
2
where x was varied between
to 9.

°

=

°

=

°

3Ti0 2 + 3B 2 0 3 + (10 + x)AI
3TiB 2 + 5AI 2 0 3 + xAl
where x was varied between
to 17.3
3ZrB 2 + 5A1P3 + xAl
3Zr0 2 + 3BP3 + (10 + x)AI
where x was varied between
and 13."

=

2BP3 + C + (4 + x)AI
B.C + 2A1 2 0 3 + xAl
where x was varied between
and 3.5

°

(1 )

{2}

(3)

(4)

The excess amount of liquid AI, created by the combustion synthesis reaction, is allowed to simultaneously infiltrate
the pores produced in the ceramic composite thereby taking advantage of this major limitation in the SHS process, and
hence improve the relative density of the composite produced. Incorporating a ductile metal into a brittle ceramic
composite matrix has considerable potential for substantial improvements in fracture toughness. A variation of reaction
(1) is given in reaction (5) in which the excess AI is used to reduce Ti0 2 and generate an excess amount of TLII

203

(3 + x)Ti0 2 + 3C + (4 + 4/3x)AI = 3TiC + (2 + 2/3x)AI20 5 + xTi

(5)

The enthalpy-temperature plots for these five reaction systems have been examined and that for reaction (1) is given
in Figure 1 in which Xr and Xp refer to the respective reactant and product H-T plots associated with the corresponding
excess amount of aluminum used in the reaction . The corresponding melting and boiling points of reactants and
products are indicated in Figure 1 and Table I.

Experimental Procedure

The reactant powders (Table 1) were thoroughly mixed using porcelain ball milling for a minimum of six hours. and
pressed to various green densities with varying values of x. into cylindrical compacts of 0.5 inches (12.7mm) in diameter
and 1 inch (2S.4mm) in length. These pellets were dried for 1 hour at 110·C in an oven and were subsequently ignited
in the propagating mode using a heated tungsten wire in an argon atmosphere as described in an earlier publication.2
The ignition temperatures , Tig, were determined using a Pt-Pt/1 O%Rh thermocouple and the combustion temperatures.
Tc, were determined using an Ircon Mirage Two Wavelength Infrared Pyrometer. A video camera was used to record
the propagation of the combustion front. In this way, it was possible to assess the stability of the combustion wave and
also its rate of propagation. The ceramic-metal composites produced were examined using optical and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) interfaced with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) facility and also by x-ray diffraction
(XRD) . The density of the products was determined using an immersion in water technique.

Results and Discussion
A maximum of 75% theoretical density could be achieved in the composites produced in reactions (1) , (2) and (3) while
an expanded or foamed ceramic-metal composite was produced in reaction (4). Reaction (3) also produced a large
volume of AIP3 whiskers while reaction (2) produced a small amount of AIP3 whiskers present in the pores of the
composite. SHS reaction stability diagrams were constructed for each of the reactions (1) -(5) as shown in Figure 2-5.
A stable combustion front was observed for each level of excess AI used in reaction (4), i.e. x = 0, 1, 2 and 3.
Increasing excess AI and green density eventually resulted in decreased stability of the combustion front and possible
quenching out. This is almost certainly the result of increased heat losses from the SHS reaction on account of
increased thermal conductivity (increased green density) and latent heat of fusion (increased excess AI). There is a
slight increase in thermal conductivity of the green pellet on increasing the excess amount of Al or Ti and increasing
the green density.2 This increased thermal conductivity could have two opposing effects: (i) the heat from the reaction
.6
front is more efficiently transferred to the reactants ahead of the reaction front and (ii) the heat lost from the reactants
ahead of the reaction front is increased. Even though the velocity of the reaction front is considered to be high
[ty pically 0.2cm s·\ for reaction (1) ,2 and (5) 6 and 2cm s·\ for reaction (2),3 7cm s" for reaction (3)4 and Scm s" for
reaction (4)].5 it is more likely that (ii) will prevail in the small reactant pellet systems used. In each reaction system
studied, except reaction (4). the aluminum becomes liquid (melting point 660· C) before the ignition temperature is
reached , ie. Tig for reaction (1) > 900·C.3 for reaction (2) >850·C,4 for reaction (3) >900·C,5 for reaction (4)
> 600· C.6 for reaction (5) of > 950· C. The typical values of Tc achieved in each system were 1600-2000· C for
re action (1). 2 1550-2300· C for reaction (2), 3 2000-2400· C for reaction (3). 4 1850-2050· C for reaction (4),5 and 20002300· for reaction (5) .6
Reaction systems (1). (2) and (5) produced considerable increases in product density with increased excess AI as
expected, eg ofrom 45% (x = 0) to 75% (x = 9) relative densities. However, unlike reaction (1), the maximum density
in the ceramic-metal product for reactions (2) and (3) were obtained at low to intermediate green densities, while
reaction (4) expanded 400% in length producing a maximum density of 35%. This is most likely due to the high
volatility of B2 0 3 used in these reactions. The calculated vapor pressures of the reactant and product species in
reactions (1) to (5) (presented in Figure 3) indicate that the combustion temperatures produced in reaction (3) resulted
in considerable volumes of both BP3 and AI gases which resulted in AI 20 3 whisker formation from a vapor-liquid-solid
mode of synthesis (Figure 4) . AIP3 whiskers were also produced in pores in the TiB2-AIP3-AI composite produced
by reaction (2). However, these whiskers were far less numerous than those produced by reaction (3) . Since the Tc
achieved in reaction (2) produces a high vapor pressure (eg. > 1 at) of B20 3 vapor and only a moderate vapor pressure
of AI gas (ie. from 10.5 to 10" at) . Both these reaction systems (2) and (3) resulted in improved product densities with
7
2
excess AI provided that lower green densities were maintained, i.e., using a compaction pressure of 1.6 x 10 kg/m
2
3
or below. The lower Tc value in react ion (4) would result in a low vapor pressure of AI ie. typically 10. to 10. at., but
the large vapor pressure of B20 3 produced by this Tc (ie. > 1 at) and the larger reaction mass of B20 3 in reaction (4)
compared with those in reactions (2) and (3) has resulted in a large volume of BP3 at 1 atmosphere pressure or higher.
This high pressure, high volume BP3 gas is able to push or expand the reactant materials ahead of the combustion

204

front in the vertical direction, thereby producing an expanded or foamed ceramic-metal composite which exhibited
~65% uniform porosity (Figure 5) and an expansion of up to 400%. The more readily predicted behavior of product
densities in reactions (1) and (5), ie. increased product densities with increased green density and excess AI, is readily
explained in the absence of any major volatile species. However, reaction (5) was able to produce a semi stable
combustion front up to at least a value of x = 50 due to the fact that the exothermicity of reaction (5) increases with
xTi. The effect of density-driven fluid flow of liquid AI was also evident in these products (Figure 6) .
Conclusions
Although reaction systems (1) to (5) use the same concept of synthesizing ceramic-metal composites, the different
physical properties of the reactants and products, eg melting and boiling points, thermal conductivity, and combustion
temperatures achieved in each system result in different product formations, morphologies, microstructures and relative
densities. The presence and extent of liquid and gaseous species appear to have a significant influence over these
product microstructures and densities. Incorporating an excess amount of metal within the combustion synthesis
reaction in which no significant gaseous phases are generated increased the composite relative density from 45% to
75% without the application of pressure. The prospect of synthesizing reinforcing whiskers in-situ from gaseous
species generated within the combustion synthesis reaction to produce a ceramic-metal composite without the problem
of handling these hazardous materials is extremely attractive. The concept of producing stability diagrams has been
introduced for these ceramic-metal combustion syntheSis reactions that indicate how the process parameters can
produce stable propagating reaction fronts. Also the effect of green density and excess Alan the composite product
density is dependent on the character and extent of the liquid and gaseoLlS species present at the reaction front. The
concept of producing expanded or foamed ceramic and ceramic-metal composites by utilizing a high volume of a
volatile specie at the reaction front has been introduced. These materials could find considerable applications varying
from catalyst support systems to filters to ultra light weight structural materials. The effect of gravity on density driven
fluid flow and vapor transport is likely to be significant in producing tough, dense ceramic-metal composites with
uniform microstructures and properties.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for partial SUppOr1 of this work from NASA, through the Microgravity Science Division - Code
SN.
References
1.
Z. A. Munir, Ceramic Bulletin, 67(2) (1988) 342.
2.
H.J. Feng, J.J. Moore, D.G. Wir1h, "The Combustion Synthesis of Ceramic-Metal Composites: The TiC-AI 20 J-AI
System", accepted for publication in Met. Trans.
3.
H.J. Feng, J.J. Moore, D.G. Wirth, "Combustion Synthesis of TiB 2-AI 20 J-AI Composite Materials" published in
proceedings of Symposium on Developments in Ceramic and Metal Matrix Composites, TMS Annual Meeting,
San Diego, March 1-5, 1992. Pub by TMS, pp 219-239.
4.
H.J. Feng, J.J. Moore, D.G. Wirth, "Combustion Synthesis of Ceramic Metal Composite Materials: The ZrB2-~05AI System" to be published in proceedings of the International Symposium on Self-Propagating High Temperature
Synthesis (SHS) , Alma-Ata, USSR, Sept 23-28, 1991 ; pub by Soviet Academy of Sciences.
5.
H.J. Feng, J.J. Moore, D.G. Wirth , "The Combustion Synthesis of B,C-AIPJ-AI Composite Materials" to be
published in proceedings of Symposium on Synthesis and Processing of Ceramics: Scientific Issues, MRS Fall
Meeting, Boston Dec 2-6 1991; pub by MRS .
6.
K. J. Hunter, J. J. Moore, D. G. Wir1h , Proceed ings of 6th International Titanium conference, San Diego, CA, June
28- Aug. 2, 1992, pUb. by TMS .
Table I. Physical Proper1ies of Reactants and Products in Reactions (1)-(5)
AI

TiC

AI2
0

B2
O:y

TiB2

Zr0 2

ZrB2

B.C

Ti

1830

660

3140

2050

450

2900

2715

3000

2450

1660

BptOC

3000

2467

4820

2980

1860

3500

3287

SG*

4.26

2.25

2.70

4.93

3.97

2.46

2.52

4.54

Size

-44

-44

-44

Material

Ti0 2

MptOC

C

-75

(~m)

-::;pecltlc Gravlt y

205

5000
4.50

5.60
-44

6.09

~

0 .9

i OOO
11.1 bot

Xr =\!

I

..:l

;;,

;::II

'"
,..'
VJ

I

2 000

VJ

,..
....

Xr=4
Xr =2

a

Xr=O

....'
'"

:z:

c--Z

Xp =4

to
'"

0

"'
;::

:>

Xp =o

Po.

....

•

•

0

;::

...
...
..:
U

0

O. B

•

•

<
H

...
:I:

•

ST ABLE

\oJ

Xp=2

- 20 00

0. 7

ILl

M

...

Col

•

Z

I><

lZ

...

&
&

ILl
Q

""
U

,..

&

0.8

ill
z

Xp =9

-<

><

UNSTABLE

"e

TiC mpt

I-

- 4000

0.5
0

1000

200 0

TBI/ PERATURE

~ooo

3 000

5

0

15

10

(K)

20

EXCESS Al ( Mo le)

Figure 1 Enthalpy·temperature plots for reactants (Xr)
and prod ucts (Xp) for various amounts of excess AI for
Reaction (1)

Figu re 2 Effect of excess AI and relative green dl::lnsity
on the stability of the propagating combustion wave for
Reaction (1) .

o.e

0.9
..:l

.5

•

"e

,..

....

....

0'
z.
"'

ILl

c

•

0.7

51 ABLE

~

\oJ

'"
....

0.6

•

I><
'"

- ~~
--

STABLE

~

H

•

SEAIl - STABLE

".

•

O. B

<

•

?"
t::i

•

'"
""
to
;::

...

0. 7

Q

ILl

:>

&

;.-

ill
z
Z

•

U NSTA BLE

&

0.8

"'
'"

0.5

0. 5

0

5

10
EXCESS Al

15

20

0

X ( ll o l e)

2

"

8

B

10

EXCESS Al ( liol e)

Fig ure 4 Effect of excess AI and relative green density
on the stability of the propagating combustion wave for
Reaction (3).

Figure 3 Effect of excess AI and relative green density
on the stabil ity of the porpagating combustion wave for
Reaction (2)

206

J

1-----1 To rl.ZI&'O f«r .... _
1-----1 TIl ranI" for ....,Uon

70

.."
..

II

.!-

...
...
iii
Z
..,
Q

•
•

65

b.
b.

Sto.ble
60

o
....

(sl,nl!lcant cr "ckln,)

"

I
.----.....--.,..-l-I---.:...:I
T;.::.e...;;r="DC=T"..:..;'' ' ;;;...:;-.,u;::;;:::.;o:.=...l(~I)
..

Tio.

0

.!!

x

Ii
..,

Z

'"
co
'"

5

rn

Seml-Sto.ble

"

(5)

(4)
f-------ITo .....:. r... -.,uo.. (3)
I Te ....... tor rMeUaa (2)

.!--6

•

!I!1

~

b.

::>
rn

~
... -10
""
:i!

50
0

10

20

30

40

50

B"O

~ -15 L-_.!.....L...I--JL-.L.-.,..---'_ _--L_ _" ' - - _ - - '

EXCESS Ti (mo l~)

500

1500

TKI.IPERATURK

Figure 5 Effect of excess Ti and relative green
density on the stabi lity of the propagating
combustion wave for Reaction (5) .

2500

3500

(K)

Figure 6 The effect of temperature on the calculated
vapor pressues of species present in Reaction (1) to
(4) .

Figure 7 AI 20 3 whisker formation during Reaction (3) .

207

(a)

(b)

Figure 8 (a) Expanded or foamed ceramic an d ce ram ic- metal composites produced by reaction (4)
comparison of reacter (left) with unreacted (right) green pellet ; (b) scanni n'd electron photomicrograph of (a)
for x = o.

Figure 9 Optical photom icrograph of TiC-AI 2 0 3 -9AI composite , indicating
AI to the bottom half of the coposite.

208

g r avi ~ y-driv e n

fluid flow of the liquid

COMMENTS
Question (Pror. Bernard J. Matkowsky, Northwestern Unive rsity): You referred to experiments in the former
Soviet Union, in which the sample produced by S.H.S. is signifIcantly expanded (i.e., its porosity is
signifIcan tly increased). I presume you are referring to the experiments of A. Shteinberg. First, in his
experiments the increase in porosi ty was due to gas being liberated, rather than consumed, in the reaction.
Was this true in your experiments as well? Second, he observed that the degree of increase in porosity was
different if the sample was arranged (1) horizontally or (2) vertically in normal gravity, and (3) in
microgravity. I understand that you have not yet done the experiments in mierogravity, but did you observe
similar differences between horizon tal and vertical arrangements in normal gravity.
Finally, you described the propagation of the combustion wave as being either (1) stable, by which yo u mean
that it propagated with a planar front with a constant velocity, or (2) unstable, by which you mean that
propagation ceased. However, in auuition to the stable moue of propagation, there have been observations
of pulsating propagation, in which a planar front propagates with an oscillatory velocity, and spinning
propagation, in which a hot spot (or spots) moves in a helical fashion . Did you observe either of these
modes of propagation?
Answer: The increase in porosity was due to gaseous species both liberateu and consumed. For example, in
combustion synthesis reactions involving B~OJ' which has a boiling point slightly in excess of 1800 degrees C,
the combustion temperature was well abo\'e this point, and, th erefore, generated B~()J gas of 1 atmosphere
pressure. At the same time, the B~OJ gas was also consumed in the reaction to produce compounds such as
TiB1 with TiB0 1 reactant or B jC with graphite as the reactant. In certain combustion synthesis reactions
that we studied, the combustio / temperature was suffIcient to produce a signifIcant volatility (i.e., partial
pressure of aluminum gas). In this respect. the aluminum gas and the B20 J gas reacteuto produce AI 20 J
whiskers. In our experimen ts, th e \'ery large levels of porosity ( e.g., greater than o r e qual to 75%) were
produced when there was only one major gaseous species produced (i.e., B10 J gas).
Yes, I was referring to Professor Alex Shtcinberg's work in Russia. Most of our experiments were conducted
in which the pellet was ignited at the boltom of the cylindrical pellet and the major expansion occurred in
the vertical direction against gravity.
We uefIned a stable combustion front as one which propagated a steady rate down through the pellet,
where in an unstable combustion front was one which eventually quenched out. Our definition of a semistable combustion front was one that slowed down, almost extinguished, and then picked up speed agai n,
probably going through two or three of these cycles. In one or two occasions we did observe a spin ning
moue of propagation , which we dclined as semi-stable front.

209

-

-

--

SESSION E - PLENARY DINNER
(Chair, Robert Rhome)

Preceding Page Blank

FIRE SAFETY PRACTICES IN THE SHUTTLE AND THE SPACE
STATION FREEDOM
Robert Friedman
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

ABSTRACT

The Shuttle reinforces its policy of fire-preventive measures with onboard smoke detectors and
Halon 1301 fire extinguishers. The forthcoming Space Station Freedom will have expanded fire protection with photoelectric smoke detectors, radiation flame detectors, and both fixed and portable carbon dioxide fire extinguishers. Many design and operational issues remain to be resolved for Freedom.
In particular, the fire-suppression designs must consider the problems of gas leakage in toxic concentrations, alternative systems for single-failure redundancy, and commonality with the corresponding
systems of the Freedom international partners. While physical and engineering requirements remain
the primary driving forces for spacecraft fire-safety technology, there are, nevertheless, needs and
opportunities for the application of microgravity combustion knowledge to improve and optimize the
fire-protective systems.
INTRODUCTION
Fire safety in spacecraft has been cited as one practical motivation for advancing microgravity
combustion research (ref. 1). Current spacecraft fire protection, however, is based largely on established fire-safety practices used in enclosed compartments, such as aircraft (ref. 2). The application
offundamental, quantitative information from microgravity combustion research could promote greater
efficiency in the design and operation of protective systems, lessen restrictions on the use of materials
and operations in space-based hardware, and reduce excessive safety factors and false alarms. Certainly, the advent of the complex, permanently orbiting Space Station Freedom offers an opportunity
for novel and improved spacecraft fire-safety techniques derived from a thorough understanding of fire
behavior in low gravity (ref. 3).
This paper is thus a review to acquaint the microgravity combustion research community with
current and proposed fire-safety practices and critical issues for U.S. human-crew spacecraft and to
suggest relevant fields where microgravity combustion research may promote spacecraft fire safety.
HAZARD ANALYSES FOR SPACECRAFI'
General Strategies
The major emphasis in spacecraft fire safety is on fire prevention through control, ifnot elimination, of one of the three elements necessary for fire, i. e., fuel, ignition, and oxygen (ref. 4). For the
first element, the control is based on a policy of qualifying acceptable materials for spacecraft use
through tests of the resistance to upward (in normal-gravity) flame spread following exposure to
promoted ignition. Of course, many necessary spacecraft items fail this test (including articles made
from paper and fabrics). Usage of these materials is permitted in limited quantities under prescribed
conditions of fire-safe storage. For the second element, control of ignition is through standard practices of electrical grounding, circuit breakers, pressure containment, and the like. There is no control
of the third element, oxygen. The Shuttle atmosphere is sea-level air, which is enriched to 30% oxygen
at a reduced total pressure of 72 kPa for prebreathing prior to an extravehicular activity. The use of
fire-resistant, reduced-oxygen atmospheres for human support in subma.--ines and other enclosed

213

Preceding Page Blank

habitats has been investigated (ref. 5). For the Shuttle and the initial phases of the Space Station
Freedom, however, design and operational considerations eliminate the consideration of other than
conventional atmospheres (ref. 4).
Fire Scenarios
Absolute fire prevention is impossible and perhaps not even desirable ifpossible. Spacecraft fire
safety must address the tradeoff of minimum risk against operational practicality, where a minimum,
residual risk level can be defined as the consequences of a worst-case fire that causing possible component damage that can suspend some operations temporarily but no human injuries (ref. 6). For the
Shuttle, plausible fire-initiating scenarios are electrical breakdowns (shorts, overloads, and arc tracking) or electromechanical overheating (motors, rotating equipment, heaters). For Freedom, potential
fire-causing scenarios are more numerous. W. Fuller and M. Halverson (cited in ref. 7) conducted a
qualitative risk assessment for the station with initiating fire scenarios covering electrical shorts,
faults in electrolysis units, oxygen leaks, chemical reactions, faulty experiments, or improper crew or
ground actions.
A complete strategy of fire protection in spacecraft thus proceeds from the assumption that fires
or their precursors will have a finite probability of occurrence. Onboard fire safety in current and
proposed spacecraft must then concentrate on fire detection, suppression, and post-fire restoration.
The description and evaluation of these fire-responsive techniques are the primary scope of this review.
BRIEF HISTORY OF U.S. SPACECRAFT FIRE SAFETY
The atmosphere in the early spacecraft, Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, was 100% oxygen, an
atmosphere in which no common organic material can truly resist fire spread. This failing was emphasized by the disastrous Apollo 204 fire in 1967, occurring during ground testing at sea-level total
pressure. The investigation of the Apollo fire led to the development of new plastic materials, the
adaptation of the present flammability-assessment methods, and the use of a diluted oxygen atmosphere for ground operations.
The development of fire-responsive techniques in spacecraft has been slower than that of fireprevention measures (ref. 2). In the simple configurations of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, the crew
members could observe the complete interior of the pressurized modules. Hence, the senses of the
human crew were adequate to detect the initiation of a fire. The water gun for food reconstitution was
designated for use as an emergency fire extinguisher. The Apollo spacecraft system added dedicated
foam-agent fire extinguishers. It was not until the introduction of the first U.S. space station, Skylab
in 1973 to 1974, however, that instrumented fire detection was incorporated in a spacecraft. The
Skylab system used 30 line-of-sight ultraviolet flame detectors, placed throughout the station.
The Skylab space station also provided the environment for a pioneering test of low-gravity
flammability, until recently the only quantitative study offire behavior under low gravity. The Skylab
study was an observation of the time-dependent flame front in the combustion of practical materials,
including aluminized Mylar, Nylon, neoprene-coated Nylon, polyurethane foam, and paper. The materials were ignited in the Skylab atmosphere of 65% oxygen in nitrogen at 36 kPa total pressure. The
flame-spread rate was calculated from comparisons of the flame-front position on successive motionpicture frames. Kimzey (ref. 9 and Appendix C of ref. 10) discussed the Skylab low-gravity and corresponding normal-gravity results and made the following key observations:

•

•

Flame-spread rates are always lower in microgravity, with comparative rates ranging from .15
to .60 those in normal gravity.
The visibility of a flame is significantly reduced in microgravity .

214

•
•

Extinguishment by vacuum is effective, and the flame is extinguished when the available oxygen
decreases sufficiently. A significant side effect is the flame intensification that develops during
the initial phase of venting.
Extinguishment by water is possible provided the application is controlled and adequate. If
insufficient water strikes a burning material, it always causes a flareup that can scatter burning
material.

The Skylab conclusions established the safety factor underlying the use of NASA normal-gravity
flammability test assessments. That is, the material-acceptance criterion assumes that any item
passing an upward-spreading normal-gravity test would be no more "flammable" in low gravity.
Recently, Pogue, one of the Skylab crew members, summarized his conclusions based on firsthand observations of the flammability study (rei 11). Pogue also noted that flame-spread rates always
are lower in low gravity than under corresponding normal gravity. However, he warned of some
qualifications to be considered in interpreting the low-gravity flame-spread data for fire-prevention,
detection, and extinguishment applications:
•
•
•
•

Porous materials may capture oxygen within items to enhance microgravity flammability.
Local agitation or displacement of air may occur from the thermomechanical response of burning
materials.
Local air flow may be induced by the usual cabin ventilation and air circulation systems.
Local air flow may be induced by fire extinguishing.
FIRE PROTECTION FOR THE SHUTI'LE

The early U.S. human-crew spacecraft were designed to meet specific mission objectives. The
Shuttle, on the other hand, is a component of a complete Space Transportation System (STS). As
originally conceived, the STS was to become the sole system for launching, maintaining, and retrieving
orbiting satellites and space probes. For practical and economic reasons, the inclusion of all space
activities into the human-crew STS has not occurred. Currently, world-wide launch operations use
non-crewed expendable launch vehicles (ELV), and the U.S. retains a mix of the STS and ELV space
transportation.
Fire Detection and Suppression Subsystem
The Shuttle normally has a pressurized atmosphere only in the front cabin, and the fuselage
payload bay is exposed to the vacuum of space. For the increasing number of Shuttle missions dedicated to micro gravity research, such as USML-1, the "payload" is the laboratory connected to the cabin
by an air lock and tunnel. The pressurized laboratory shares its life-support system with the Shuttle
cabin.
Fire protection for the Shuttle cabin and any pressurized laboratory is provided through a Fire
Detection and Suppression Subsystem, which is a component of the Shuttle Environmental Control
and Life Support System (ECLSS). The Shuttle cabin and its pressurized laboratories use ionizationtype smoke detectors. Two units are located in each of three electronics bays for redundancy (a singlefault tolerant system). The smoke detectors are identical in principle to ionization detectors in common use in buildings and aircraft, although they have particular adaptations for spacecraft use
(ref. 12). An integral fan creates a flow across entrance port to the ionization chamber to bypass
larger, high-momentum particles, assumed to be dust, not smoke. The fan flow also insures adequate
sampling in the absence of natural convection. Unfortunately, the bypass system may reject larger
smoke agglomerates, possibly characteristic of a microgravity fire, reducing the detector sensitivity.
The set points, determined by normal-gravity smoke-chamber calibrations, are established at very sensitive levels, however, well below those associated with visible smoke.

215

Fig. 1 shows the flight deck fire-protection panel, which has indicators for smoke-detector alarm
status and actuators for the fixed fire extinguishers installed in the Shuttle cabin and in its payloadbay laboratory. These extinguishers, as well as additional portable extinguishers, are charged with
Halon 1301 (bromotrifluoromethane). The manufacture and commercial use of Halon 1301, which is
recognized as having a potential to deplete ozone in the stratosphere, is to be eliminated by international protocol in the next decade. There are no immediate plans for replacement ofthe Halon 1301
agent on the Shuttle. While Halon 1301 is a very effective agent for many fires, it can generate halogen acid gases, which are toxic and corrosive. Shuttle mission rules call for an immediate termination
of the mission and return to Earth following discharge of a fire extinguisher.
Shuttle Mission Experience
Several minor incidents with fire-causing potential have occurred on Shuttle missions (ref. 13).
On two reported occasions, the crew detected a smoke odor, and subsequent examination showed
overheated components. In the first incident, on STS-6, April 1983, an odor was caused by the fusing
of overheated wires near a space-processing unit. No degradation products were found in an atmospheric sampling; presumably, the carbon filter in the Shuttle ECLSS was effective in removing the
trace compounds contributing to the odor. In the second incident, on STS-35, December 1990, the crew
reported a smoke odor and a one-ampere current surge, before the failure of an overheated resistor
in an elapsed-time circuit of a digital display unit shut off power to the unit. No atmospheric changes
were otherwise noted. Recently, the STS-50 crew (July 1992) reported an odor and the failure of a
medical apparatus, which was later traced to a blown electrical capacitor.
An incident of potentially greater consequence occurred on STS-28, August 1989, when a cable
strain and insulation failure caused an electrical short circuit at a teleprinter unit. The crew observed
sparks and 4 or 5 glowing embers during a period of about one to two seconds at the vicinity of the
cable. One of the smoke detectors showed an increased particle-concentration level of 158 p.g/ms for
about 60 sec, with a momentary peak at 180 p.glm3, levels well below the alarm set point of 2000
pglms. Based on the observed mass of pyrolyzed material released from the burned wire insulation,
calculations showed that the air-borne particle concentration could have exceeded the set-point concentration (C. Asuncion and B. Harkness, Rockwell International, internal letter, October 1990). Several
reasons for the low observed smoke-concentration level reading were suggested:

•
•
•

Some pyrolyzed mass was in particles larger than 50 p.m (as observed by the crew) that bypassed
the detector chamber.
Some mass was in particles adsorbed on surfaces.
Some mass was produced as gases rather than as aerosols.

The Shuttle mission experience confirms that breakdowns threatening incipient fires have finite
probabilities. At the same time, the fire-protective systems and the alertness of the crew have been
shown to be effective in recognizing and responding to these minor incidents.
FIRE PROTECTION FOR THE SPACE STATION FREEDOM
The proposed Space Station Freedom will not be the first permanently inhabited satellite system
of this kind. Freedom, however, represents the first completely original approach to this space community, rather than a derivative assemblage with adapted components from earlier missions. Freedom
will provide greatly expanded accommodations for life science studies, microgravity science and technology, earth observations, space probe launching, and satellite servicing. Obviously, potential hazard
situations and consequent fire-pr otection demands will increase considerably over the pr oposed 30
years of continuous operations, compared to those for the short-duration missions of the Shuttle.

216

I~'

"-

Preliminary Assembly and Atmospheres
Eventually, the Space Station Freedom assembly will evolve into a complex truss, module, and
attachment assembly, the configuration usually publicized. The immediate concern of fire safety,
however, is in the protection of the Man-Tended Configuration (MTC). The MTC is the minimum
assembly of components necessary to sustain human activities within the station, a state anticipated
to be completed in about six Shuttle-tended assembly operations, perhaps a year or so after the date
of the first element launch (fig. 2). The working volume of the MTC consists of three pressurized
modules: a laboratory, resource node, and docking adapter (ref. 14). The module atmosphere will have
a composition of 30% oxygen in nitrogen at a total pressure of 72 kPa to permit ready egress for spacesuited extravehicular activities, without the need for prebreathing to avoid decompression sickness
(ref. 15). Clearly, this enriched-oxygen atmosphere increases the potential fire hazard over that of
standard air. Freedom will be occupied by the crew only during the Shuttle-tended periods from the
MTC until the final configuration of the Permanently Manned Capability. The pressurized atmosphere
will be retained in the modules during the untended periods between assembly phases.
Fire-Protection Principles
The designs for the Space Station Freedom fire protection follow the principles established for
the Shuttle. Again, flammability testing will screen out many materials and components from use.
The Fire Detection and Suppression subsystem (FDS) is a component of the Environmental Control
and Life Support System (ECLSS). The key requirements for fire detection and suppression (H. Kolnsberg, Boeing, unpublished presentation, Nov. 1991) are summarized as
•
•
•
•
•
•

independent FDS in each module or element,
fire protection of untended locations without need for monitoring by onboard or ground personnel,
data management system to provide a remote signal indicating a fire and fire location,
automatic and manual means of fire suppression,
nontoxic extinguishing agents compatible with the ECLSS, and
single-failure-tolerant designs for the FDS.

These common-sense requirements have proven to be very difficult to meet, however, because of the
severe limitations on mass, volume, and power in the station. The ability of current designs in achieving the desired goal of efficient FDS operation in the confined quarters of Freedom remains to be
demonstrated.
Freedom Fire-Detection Designs

The interior of the cylindrical Space Station Freedom modules has a central core surrounded by
banks of racks along the walls, ceiling, and floor for installation of equipment for experiments, flight
monitoring, life support, and housekeeping (fig. 3). The basic configuration of a standard r ack, constructed of graphite-epoxy composite materials, is illustrated in fig. 4. Powered racks, those with
utilities and electricity, are to be protected with a smoke detector in the internal ventilating-air return
collector and a solenoid-activated signal-flag alarm indicator. In the proposed Freedom smoke-detector,
shown in concept in fig. 5, smoke particles in the air stream attenuate and scatter a laser beam.
Radiation sensors in the detector provide an analog signal proportional to the smoke-particle concentration. Prototype smoke detectors are now being evaluated in normal-gravity tests for smoke response, mechanical characteristics, and electrical performance.
The single-point-failure tolerance specification stated in the preceding section implies the redundancy that, upon the failure of a primary system, protection will be retained through an equally reliable secondary system. Initial Freedom designs offered redundancy by duplicate photoelectric smoke
and thermal detectors in each powered rack and additional smoke detectors in the common module
air-supply ducting. Design simplifications, however, eliminated the theTlilal detectors (which are

217

probably ineffective for early warning, anyhow) to save mass and eliminated the common ducting in
favor of individual fans for distributed ventilation systems in each powered rack. New approaches to
guarantee single-failure tolerance in the current ECLSS designs are still under consideration.
Fire detection in the central module core, in contrast to that in the powered racks, is provided
by flame detectors, sensing radiation from overheating components or incipient flames. The proposed
Space Station Freedom flame detectors incorporate three sensors in each unit, tuned to ultraviolet,
visible, and infrared wavelength bands. Built-in test equipment in the form of internal light sources
offer periodic operational checks. While this detector concept has the advantage of multiple-response
logic from three signals to distinguish a potential fire from stray radiation, appropriate alarm set
points are not yet established. These definitions require information on microgravity flame temperatures, spectral qualities, and their time variations.
Fig. 6 is a sketch of the end cone of the laboratory module, identifying several of the many components mounted on, or passing through, the end cone. The proposed flame detector is shown,
installed for a line of sight into the central model core. Since a corresponding detector will be mounted
on the opposite end cone, the two detectors, observing in effect the same volume, satisfy the singlefailure-tolerant design requirement.
While the smoke and flame detectors discussed are the fire-detection systems currently specified
for the Freedom MTC configuration, alternative concepts are under study. An obvious method of
promise is the use of atmospheric gas sampling, already considered for ECLSS quality monitoring
(ref. 16). The most sensitive indication of pyrolysis and combustion of almost aU organic materials is
carbon monoxide evolution, although effective sampling systems must be devised for improved response times if gas-sampling applications to fire detection are considered (ref. 13).
Freedom Fire-Suppression Designs

For the Space Station Freedom, the designated fire-suppression agent is carbon dioxide, which
offers environmental and logistic advantages over the current Shuttle agent, Halon 1301. The selection of carbon dioxide is justified by the results of several system trade-off studies (summarized in
r ef. 8) and normal-gravity evaluations (ref. 17). The removal of excess carbon dioxide, at least in
modest quantities, is within the capabilities of the Space Station Freedom ECLSS.
The Freedom fire-suppression designs must meet specified requirements (M. Gard, NASA Marshall, unpublished presentation, March 1992). Foremost among these are

•

•
•
•
•

•

confirmation of a fire prior to automatic suppressant release,
allowable CO2 leakage to the general module to be no greater than a maximum concentration,
to be specified,
CO2 supply in any module sufficient for at least two releases into the largest enclosed volume
(powered rack),
two portable fire extinguishers located in separate areas in each module,
each portable fire extinguisher capable of extinguishing a fire in the largest enclosed volume, and
inadvertent CO2 release prevented by two-failure tolerant designs.

The proposed fire-suppression system, which is a derivative of the current Shuttle technology,
consists of a combination offixed and portable extinguishers. In brief, the logic, shown in a simplified
representation in fig. 7, offers choices of no action, manual suppression, or automatic suppression in
r esponse to an apparent fire alarm. The automatic system is a centralized delivery system with
r emotely operated release valves at each powered rack. A conceptual sketch of the proposed system
is shown in fig. 8. The portable fire extinguishers will be accessible at each end-cone location, as
shown in fig. 6.

218

I
i

The Freedom fire-suppression system is sized to deliver suppressant to achieve a 50%-vol. concentration in the largest powered rack (with excess pressure venting as necessary) within one minute of
agent release. The designers prefer to avoid two-phase flow in the delivery system; hence, the system
is limited in capacity, because the carbon dioxide storage must be at less than the saturation pressure
at ambient temperatures, i.e., as a superheated gas (ref. 18).
Freedom Fire-Suppression Problems

It is evident that there are serious problems to be resolved in the design and operation of the
Freedom fire-suppression system. The most important issues are
•
•
•

non-conformity to the general requirements for the FDS,
lack of commonality among international program partners, and
prescribed agent that is unacceptable for use in the Hyperbaric Air Lock.

Despite the requirement limiting the maximum atmospheric leakage concentration of carbon
dioxide, the designation of this agent as meeting the "nontoxic" requirement may be questioned. In
addition, the redundancy for the single-failure-tolerance has not been achieved. Original design proposals called for backup suppression by venting the atmosphere to the vacuum of space. At present,
the objections to venting are that the venting flow temporarily enhances the burning rate in microgravity (ref. 9), the final total pressure for guaranteed fire suppression is unknown, and the stores of
makeup atmospheres for reconstitution after ve"
nting are limited.
The Space Station Freedom is an international program, with Japan and the European Space
Agency (ESA) each contributing pressurized laboratory modules in the final space-station configuration. The international laboratories will be assembled after the MTC, but their development is now
underway. The FDS designs for the international modules are derived independently of the corresponding U.S. subsystems, but the subsystems interconnect through common data-management systems
and intermodule ventilation flows. All three international partners now agree on a carbon dioxide
system for fire suppression, with many details equivalent in principle to those established for the U.S.
modules. There are, however, some primary design and operational differences. Most of these variations do not affect safety, but one discrepancy is of concern. Because of possible system icing and
limited pressure-relief capacity, the suppressant-flow system cannot deliver the required quantity of
carbon dioxide in one minute in the ESA module. A maximum release-time specification of 30 minutes
was requested, an unreasonable delay time for fire suppression in a closed environment. A compromise goal of lO-min delivery time is now under consideration, a delay that still is regarded as unsatisfactory by safety specialists.
The Hyperbaric Air Lock (HAL) is a chamber within one of the modules, sized to accommodate
a patient and a medical attendant for treatment of decompression sickness and for other medical
activities. While the HAL is not a component of the MTC assembly, its fire protection is actively
under development. The HAL will have an atmosphere of 21% O2 in nitrogen at a maximum total
pressure of 340 kPa. If carbon dioxide is released to extinguish a fire in the HAL, the medical specialists fear that the resulting partial pressure of carbon dioxide at the proposed suppression concentration in the HAL will be highly toxic.
A recent communication (S. Pool, NASA Johnson, unpublished letter, April 1992) discussed
alternative fire-prevention and suppression approaches for the HAL, although none of these are ready
for development. The HAL proposal is to retain the common fire-detection system of the U.S. laboratory module, but to install a separate, dedicated fire-suppression system. The proposed fire-suppression concept includes nitrogen purging of electrical and instrument racks within the HAL for firstorder fire prevention. Primary fire suppression will be furnished by a portable nitrogen extinguisher,
which is a method that has no design counterpart in conventional fire-extinguisher technology. In
219

addition, a fixed nitrogen-suppression system will release nitrogen to dilute the HAL atmosphere after
extinguishment to prevent reignition.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper discussed the features of fire protection incorporated into current and proposed U.S.
human-crew spacecraft. In general, there is a strong reliance on preventive measures along with use
of proven detection and suppression techniques. The experience with minor "near-fires" on Shuttle
missions has shown that the crew response is the major factor in alleviating danger, but designed
safety provisions offer an adequate backup.
For the future Space Station Freedom, dependence on human response will not be sufficient, and
reliable automated fire protection is essential. The difficulties facing the Freedom environmental- and
safety-design specialists must be appreciated. The principal drivers for the designs and operations
are the stringent and sometimes conflicting (and often changing) specifications, to be met within the
severe restrictions on material and component mass, volume, power, quality control, and cost. Certain
alternatives, such as those for multiple-failure-tolerant features, await new inventions well beyond the
present state-of-the-art. In addition, the fire-safety provisions must advance the goal offull utilization
of Freedom, must allow for the long-duration conduct of a varied crew, and must satisfy the individual
safety approaches of international partners tied into the common safety network.
While it would appear that microgravity combustion research plays a secondary role in spacecraft
fire-protection strategies, effective and trustworthy fire protection can benefit greatly from fundamental scientific knowledge. The microgravity combustion research community has much to offer
advanced spacecraft fire safety. Already spacecraft fire safety is guided by preliminary information
on microgravity ventilation effects and radiant flame (non-flickering) characteristics. Examples of
other important needs that may be addressed by microgravity combustion research are the assessment
and prediction of material flammability, the physical and radiant characteristics of fires, gaseous and
aerosol emissions from fires, the physical and chemical actions of extinguishment, and the long-duration toxic and corrosive effects of combustion and extinguishment products.
REFERENCES
1. Law , C., Combustion in Microgravity: Opportunity, Challenges, and Progress. AIAA Paper
90-0120, Jan. 1990.
2. Friedman, R., and Olson, S., Fire Safety Applications for Spacecraft, in "Aircraft Fire Safety",
AGARD Conf. Publ. No. 467, Oct. 1989, pp. 15-1 to 15-15.
3. Rodney, G., Critical Safety Assurance Factors for Manned Spacecraft - A Fire Safety Perspective. IAF Paper 90-555, Oct. 1990.
4. Friedman, R., and Sacksteder, K, Fire Behavior and Risk Analysis in Spacecraft. NASA
TM 100944, Nov. 1989.
5. Knight D., Medical Guidelines for Protecting Crews with Flame-Suppressant Atmospheres.
SAE Tech. Paper 891596, July 1989.
6. Peercy, R., and Raasch, R., Threat-strategy Technique: A System Safety Tool for Advanced
Design. Jour. Spacecraft, vol. 23, no. 2, 1986, pp. 200-206.
7. Kaplan, S. , Safety Risk Assessment in the Space Station Freedom. AIAA Paper 90-3771,
Sept. 1990.
8. Friedman, R. , Sacksteder, K, and Urban, D., Risks, Designs, and Research for Fire Safety in
Spacecraft. NASA TM 105317, Nov. 1991.
9. Kimzey, J ., Skylab Experiment M479 Zero Gravity Flammability, in "Skylab Results",
Proc. Third Space Processing Symp., NASA MSFC M-74-5 (NASA TM X-70252), vol. 1, Jan. 1974,
pp. 115-130.

220

_J

- - - ._ -- -- --

- - - --

10. Youngblood, W., and Vedha-N ayagam, M., Advanced Spacecraft Fire Safety: Proposed Projects
and Program Plan, NASA CR 185147, Oct. 1989.
11. Pogue, B., Skylab Mission, in Baugher, C., ed., "Space Station Freedom Toxic and Reactive
Materials Handling", NASA CP 3085, July 1990, pp. 5-1 to 5-7.
12. Thomas, E., Microgravity Fire Detection Problems - Fact or Fiction, SAE Tech. Paper 901215,
July 1990.
13. Limero, T., James, J., Cromer, R., and Beck, S., A Combustion Products Analyzer for Contingency Use During Tbermodegradation Events in Spacecraft. SAE Tech. Paper 911479, July 1991.
14. Sendral, E., Overview and Status of Space Station Freedom Modules. A1AA Paper 92-1307,
March 1992.
15. McCarthy, K, and Green, J., The Effect of Reduced Cabin Pressure on the Crew and Life
Support System. SAE Tech. Paper 911331, July 1991.
16. Sonnenschein, R., and Hienerwadel, K, Evaluation ofthe Suitability of CO Measurements for
Fire Detection in Space. SAE Tech. Paper 901285, July 1990.
17. Sircar, S., and Dees, J., Evaluation of the Fire Extinguishants for Space Station Freedom.
NASA JSC White Sands Test Facility Doc. TR-650-001, Mar. 1992.
18. Gedke, J., Mohamadinejad, R., and Gard, M., Preliminary Analyses ofthe CO2 Fire Suppressant Distribution System for Space Station Freedom. SAE Tech. Paper 911473, July 1991.

221

----,

o

EXTINGUISHER
ACTUATORS

..... , ...... ,

~· ' .I _1~ I>OOo--.

......

)

mr@~
B~8

It:.!~~1

DETECT10N
INDICATORS

Figure. 1. - Shuttle Fire Detecti nQ ami Suppre ssion Panel

RESOURCE NODE 2

Freedo n.
Figure 2. - Sketch of the Man-T ended Config uration of Space Station

222

Figure 3. - Phantom view of the U.S. Laboratory Module for J:t'reediJm , showing central core and
rack arrangement (boeing design).

203 em (8U in.)

Figure 4. - Typical rack design for the Space Station Freedom.

223

LASER SOURCE AND
DETECTOR HOUSING

6.7 em

~
1.9 em

I

8.9 em

~
REFlECnNG
MIRRORS

Figure 5. - C0uCcp<. 0f photoelectric smoke detector proposed for Freedom racks (Allied Signal
design).

HATCH

TRACK

PORTABLE
E EXTINGUISHER

Figure 6. - End-cone arrangement of Freedom Laboratory Module

224

,
I

------ -1I
I

I
I
I

-------- 1
I
I
I
I

_J

I

I

Figure 7. - Fire detection and suppression response logic for Freedom .

F'=E DETECTION AND
~~?PR ES SION PA NEL

POWERED RACK

~~~~~~- Per10rated CO,

DispersIOn Tube

Vemilating-air RelUr"
from Equipment
Smol<e-detectlon

Station

Flexible Line to
Remote CO, Valve - - -

CO: Supply

Figure 8. - Proposed Space Station Freedom carbon dioxide suppression system.

225

II

SESSION F - IGNITION, SMOLDER, AND FLAME SPREAD OF
CONDENSED PHASE FUELS
(Chair, Raymond Friedman)

Preceding Page Blank

I

IGNITION AND SUBSEQUENT FLAME SPREAD OVER A THIN
CELLULOSIC MATERIAL
Kazuyoshi Nakabe,· Howard R. Baum, and Takashi Kashiwagi
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899

Introduction
Both ignition and flame spread on solid fuels are processes that not only are of considerable scientific
interest but that also have important fire safety applications. Both types of processes, ignition and flame
spread, are complicated by strong coupling between chemical reactions and transport processes, not only
in the gas phase but also in the condensed phase. In most previous studies, ignition and flame spread were
studied separately with the result that there has been little understanding of the transition from ignition
to flame spread. In fire safety applications this transition is crucial to determine whether a fire will be
limited to a localized, temporary bum or will transition into a growth mode with a potential to become
a large fire. In order to understand this transition, the transient mechanisms of ignition and subsequent
flame spread must be studied. However, there have been no definitive experimental or modeling studies,
because of the complexity of the flow motion generated by buoyancy near the heated sample surface. One
must solve the full Navier-Stokes equations over an extended region to represent accurately the highly
unstable buoyant plume and entrainment of surrounding gas from far away. In order to avoid the
complicated nature of the starting plume problem under normal gravity, previous detailed radiative ignition
models were assumed to be one-dimensional (reU) or were applied at a stagnation point (ref.2). Thus,
these models cannot be extended to include the transition to flame spread. The mismatch between
experimental and calculated geometries means that theories cannot be compared directly with experimental
results in normal gravity.
To overcome the above difficulty, theoretical results obtained without buoyancy can be directly compared
with experimental data measured in a microgravity environment. Thus, the objective of this study is to
develop a theoretical model for ignition and the transition to flame spread and to make predictions using
the thermal and chemical characteristics of a cellulosic material which are measured in normal gravity.
The model should take advantage of the microgravity environment as much as possible in the gas phase
instead of modifying a conventional normal-gravity approach. A thermally-thin cellulosic sheet is
considered as the sample fuel, which might ignite and exhibit significant flame spread during test times
available in NASA's drop towers or in the space shuttle, without requiring a pilot flame. This last situation
eliminates many complicating parameters such as pilot flame location, temperature, and size (reL3).

• Guest researcher from Osaka University, Osaka Japan.

L______

Preceding Page Blank
229

2. Theoretical Model
2.1 Gas Phase Model
The absence of gravity (microgravity is approximated to be zero gravity) removes the buoyancy-induced
vorticity generation mechanism. The small scale of the planned experiment, togeth er with the slow external
flow (less than 10 cm/s), simulating the ventilation flow level in a spacecraft, implies a low Reynolds
number flow domain. When surface pyrolysis is present, the thermally-induced surface blowing velocity
must be taken into account, even at low Reynolds numbers. Both these concepts can be accommodated
by assuming the velocity field to be a potential flow. The only loss is the no-slip boundary condition
which is already relaxed in the classical Oseen approximation to low Reynolds number phenomena. This
approximation is adopted and is implicit in the analysis. The conservation equations of mass, energy and
species in the gas phase under low Mach number combustion and heat transfer conditions can be written
as:

Dp +pV-v=O

Dt

'

(1)

DY

p_f - V{pDVY) = -ril
f
Dt

We assume that the reaction is represented by a global one step Arrhenius reaction and its kinetic
constants are selected. Equations (1) are supplemented by an equation of state, taken in a form appropriate
for low-Mach-number flows. Now multiply the first of Eqs. (1) by enthalpy, h, and add it to the second.
The result is:

(2)
Equation (2) is the fundamental equation for determining the velocity field V. Since
it can be decomposed into the gradient of a potential <I> and a solenoidal field U.

v= V4> +u,

V-ii=O

v is

a vector field
(3)

Substitution of Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) yields:
(4)

Note that the third term on the right hand side of the first equation of Eq. (4) can be eliminated by
introducing a particular solution <l>p as:

(5)

Moreover, it is convenient to introduce another particular potential <l>poo representing the effects of the
external wind velocity u"". Then, introducing a remainder potential <1>, <I> may be expressed in the

230

I

L

(6)
n:f
Equations (5) and (6) relate the potential field to the temperature distributions in the gas phase. In the
calculation the sample is irradiated and auto-ignited at the center by continuous thermal radiant flux with
a Gaussian distribution. Far from the surface, <1>, T and Y i must decay to their ambient initial values. T
and Y i decay exponentially to their ambient values. However, the potential field decays slowly away from
the heated region. Thus, putting <I> or its gradient equal to zero at the computational boundary would
introduce unacceptable error into the calculation. These errors are avoided by using the analytical solution
to Eq.(6) subject to the boundary condition at the sample surface to generate accurate values for <I> on the
computational boundary (ref.4). Then, Eqs.(l) are solved by a time-splitting algorithm.
2.2 Condensed Phase Model
It is assumed that the condensed phase is a thermally thin sheet of cellulosic material, and
uniform in composition through its depth. The thermal degradation of the cellulosic sheet is described by
two global thermal degradation reactions and a char oxidation reaction (ref.5). They are; (1) endothermic
global pyrolysis reaction which degrades the cellulosic sheet to gases and a char, (2) weakly exothermic
global thermal oxidative reaction which degrades the cellulose sheet to gases and a char, (3) highly
exothermic global char oxidation reaction which degrades the char to gases and ash. Here, it is assumed
that the reactivity of the chai with oxygen formed from the above two reactions with oxygen is the same.
In the above global reactions combustible gases represent hydrocarbons and CO and non-combustible
gases represent CO 2 and H 20. Here, it is assumed that the combustible gases formed from each reaction
above are the same. Although these reactions are crudely approximated compared to the actual, extremely
complex degradation reactions, their accuracy is comparable to the global one-step gas phase oxidation
reaction for the combustible gases, which is used for the gas phase reaction in this study.
The reaction rate of each reaction above, RR i , is approximately expressed by the following Arrhenius-type
equations:

Values for the above kinetic parameters together with the heats of reaction , 6.H i , for a black cellulosic
paper have been measured; the details are given in Ref.5 .
The equations for the condensed phase are given as follows .
Conservation of solid mass:

Conservation of initial cellulosic material:

iJ(PsYr/Pso)/iJt

= -RRp - RRox

(8)

Conservation of char:

(9)
Conservation of energy:

231

(10)
where b is the half-thickness of the paper. The mass flux of evolved combustible gases from the surface
is given by the following expression:
ms

= [( I-v char,p)RR p+(1-v char,Qx)RRQX +(1-v ash,char)RRchar ] "PsoO

(11)

The cellulosic material used in the present study is a 0.38x10-4 m thick sheet.
3. Results and Discussion
Four different cases are being studied: (1) heat transfer with the degradation of the paper sheet irradiated
by the external radiation at the center of the paper in an axisymmetric configuration, no gas phase
reaction; no external flow, (2) ignition and subsequent flame spread in an axisymmetric configuration; no
external flow, (3) heat transfer with a slow external flow in a three-dimensional configuration, and (4)
ignition and subsequent flame spread with a slow external flow in a three-dimensional configuration. Since
the results in the first case were published in ref A, they are not discussed here due to space limitations.
3.1 Quiescent axisymmetric configuration
A maximum external radiant flux of 5 W/cm 2 (continuously on during computation) at 21 %, 30% and
50% oxygen concentrations was used in the calculation. The results indicate that ignition is observed for
21 % and 30% oxygen concentrations but the transition to flame spread does not occur. However, in 50%
oxygen the transition is achieved as shown in Fig.1 which plots the gas phase temperature distribution at
LOs after initiation of the external radiation. Each temperature isotherm line is a 1000K interval starting
from 350 o K. There are two high temperature regions;one is behind the flame front and ~he other is at the
center where the external radiation continuously irradiates the sample. The results at later time show that
there are two separate flames; the primary flame propagates radially outward, while the secondary flame
stays at the center and becomes gradually weaker and disappears. Eventually one ring-like flame appears
to continue its spread radially outward. The distribution of velocity vectors at the same time is shown in
Figs.2. The large expansion flow motion near the flame front is clearly seen in Fig.2. The large mass
addition near the center is caused by the continuously applied external radiation. Since the sample was
nearly completely converted to char at the center, little mass is added there. The distribution of oxygen
and fuel concentration indicates that the flame near the traveling front is a premixed flame followed by
a diffusion flame behind the flame front. The energy balance at the sample surface at LOs is shown in
Fig.3, where Q ex is the external radiant flux, Qrad is the re-radiation loss, Q rr is the net heat balance of
the three solid degradation reactions and Q CCOII is the convective/conductive heat transfer from the gas
phase to the sample. A high energy feedback rate of nearly 6 W/cm 2 is calculated as opposed to the nearly
1 W/cm 2 for the 21 % oxygen concentration case at 1.6s after initiation of the external radiation as shown
in FigA. This difference in energy feedback rate is mainly caused by differences in flame temperature
(about 1400 0K for 21% vs 2000 0K for 50%) and also in the location of the peak gas phase reaction rate
(closer to the sample surface in 50% oxygen concentration).
The previous experiment in a quiescent microgravity environment showed that the flame spread limit is
about 20% oxygen for a light paper towel (Kimwipes paper) (ref.6). Thus, unsuccessful transition to flame
spread in 21 % and 30% oxygen predicted in this study does not agree with successful transition observed
in the experimental work. Also, the predicted flame spread rate in 50% oxygen concentration is about 19
cm/s which is roughly five times faster than the experimentally-measured rate using the drop tower (ref.6).
In the calculation the only uncertainty is the kinetic constants for the gas phase oxidation reaction. Since

232

there are no data available on the degradation products of the paper, the accuracy of the selected values
is questionable. Since there are significant differences between the experimental setup and the calculation,
for example, a two-dimensional experimental configuration vs. an axisymmetric calculation and piloted
ignition in the experiment vs. auto-ignition, no attempt is made to adjust the kinetic constants of the gas
phase reaction to match with the experimental data. These constants will be measured in the future.
3.2 Three-dimensional Calculation
Although preliminary results on ignition in the three dimensional configuration with a slow external flow
have been obtained, more time is needed to determine their accuracy and correctness. It is hoped that the
results will be presented at the meeting. Here, the results for the three dimensional heat transfer problem
are briefly discussed. In this problem either a thermally thin or thick non-reactive condensed material is
irradiated by continuously applied external radiation with a Gaussian flux distribution. Typical examples
of the distributions of velocity vectors relative to the ambient flow and temperature contours in the gas
phase for a thermal\y thick non-reactive material are shown in Figs. 5 at 8s after the initiation of an
external radiant flux of 4 W/cm 2 with an external velocity of 2 cm/s (from left to right). The left corner
figure in Figs. 5 represents the front view (looking in the downstream direction) distribution. The top
rectangular figure represents the side view of the distribution and the lower rectangular figure represents
the top view of the distribution. The distribution of velocity vectors represent the flow motion generated
by heat addition from the irradiated surface. This flow is smal\er than the external flow of 2 cm/s. Its
center is located at a short distance upstream from the center of the external irradiation (x=O). This
indicates that the steepest temperature gradient occurs at the upstream location due to downward pushing
of the heated layer by the ambient flow. At a short distance downstream from x=O, there is a sink of flow
due to the steep temperature gradient due to heat loss from the hot gas stream to the cold surface. Since
the temperature gradient drives the flow, the flow generated by the external radiation is limited to a region
near the irradiated surface area at an early time.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Future plans
Complete development of the three-dimensional ignition and flame spread code.
Conduct parametric study to determine which parameters affect ignition, the trnsition, and flame spread.
Measure global gas phase oxidation reaction rate for the degradation products of the paper.
Modify the codes to include piloted-ignition.

Reference
l.Kashiwagi,T, "A Radiative Ignition Model of a Solid Fuel", Combustion Science and Technology, 8,
1974, pp.225-236.
2.Amos,B. and Fernandez-Pello,A.C., "Model of the Ignition and Flame Development on a Vaporizing
Combustible Surface in a Stagnation Point Flow: Ignition by Vapor Fuel Radiation Absorption",
Combustion Science and Technology, 62, 1988, pp.331-343.
3.Tzeng,L.S., Atreya, A., and Wichman,LS., "A One-Dimensional Mode! of Piloted Ignition", Combustion
and Flame, 80, 1990, pp.94-107.
4.Kushida,G., Baum,H.R., Kashiwagi,T. and di Blasi, c., "Heat and Mass Transport from Thermal\y
Degrading Thin Cellulosic Materials in a Microgravity Environment", Journal of Heat Transfer, 114,
1992, p.p484-502.
5.Kashiwagi,T. and Nambu,H., "Global Kinetic Constants for Thermal Oxidative Degradation of a
Cellulosic Paper", Combustion and Flame, 88, 1992, pp.345-368.
6.0Ison,S.L., Ferkul,P.Y., and l1en,J.S., "Near-Limit Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel in
Microgravity", 1Wenty Second Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA, 1988, pp.1213-1222.

233

I
L __________

_____~ ___ J

10.Ocm/s
::>-

6

6

04

4

8

---'

N

2

2

0

0

14

Fig. 1

Q

Temperature contour in the
gas phase

Fig. 2

[W/em 2 ]

[W/em 2 ]

Q

6~-------------------

6~------------------1\------~

4

Velocity vector

\

\

2

o

"-, ,--------:-:-:--==---

V ----------------

----

-2

Qex

---- Qex
---- ---- Qrad
--- - QRR

-------- Q rad

---- QRR

-4

-4

- - - Qfcon

-6~--~--~--~--_.--_.--_,--~

o

2

6

4

8
r

Fig. 3

10

12

o

14

[em]

Energy balance at the surface
50% oxygen

- - - Qfcon

2

Fig. 4

6

4

8

10

r [em]

Energy blanace at
the surface in air

0 .2 em/s

-

.. .. ......
.... . ... . .. .
""
....

4

Y

2

o

-4
-2
o ~~

0

'1

. _.~ ,,_

~ r.~!!\\\m

6

10 X 12 4

.::___
__
.
fern]

Fig. 5

~
~

. ....
.... . .

Velocity vector in 3D flow

Y

2

o

I
-4

i

I

-2

0

2

!

,

O-+--~

~ --'------- - - - --

!

:0

X

I

I

I
--- --->, I
[ : ;-:1 ]

Temperature contour in 3D flow

234

I
J

COMMENTS
Qu estion (Davitl Schiller, U.c. Irvinc): I have two questions rega rding yo ur num e ric al tcc hn iqu l .
(1) Tn your paper, you state that you use a time-splilling algorithm to so lve th e g()ve rnin ~ equ ;lti ll ns. I have
tried using different tim e steps for transport anti chemical kin eti cs in my model of llam e spre;ld "\'e r liquid
fu el pools. I have fo und that significant e rrors arc introduced if th c so luti o n of th e che mi ca l kinl·tic a nd
transpo rt conditio ns a re decoupled in this mann er. Will yo u please describe yo ur tim e-sp lill il1f!. :dgorithm ill
more det ail anti also telime what yo u've done (if anything) to show th at yo ur time-s plill ing algllli thm IS
"t im e ste p independe nt" and/or gives the same results as you would gc t if no time-s pl itt ing was 11·· ed·)

(2) It appea rs igniti on occurs ve ry cl ose to th c solid fuci surface. Is you r so lu tion grid indl'pe nd, Ilt'? How
fine a mesh was req uired in the gas just above the fuel surface (I use deha-y" of abo ut 50 Illi cr(ll;, at th e
gas/liquid interface in my problcm . Do you incorporate a pa rti all y or full y a~l ap ti ve gri d sl" hcl1ll to provide
fin e resolution nca r the name leasing edge as the name propagat es?
!;gl'"tcti in the qu esti o n.
A nswer: Th c algorithm c mployed in the computations is not tilli e-s plit in th e se nse SU
It is a mcmber of a class analyzed by Wichman (I). I3a sically, fll r a ~i n gl e-s t e p reacti on mllli el pi the kind
used in many co mbusti on studi es (including this on e) th c reacti'ln is alm ost a lways e ith e r mu eh , lower th an
or mu ch faster th an th c local diffu sion-convection balan ce. Und er th e. e circu mstances, it is Il(ls,ih le to show
ana lytica lly th at th c specics and encrgy equ ation ' ca n be atlva nCl: d hy spli ll ing th e ti me sll: p in th,' fo ll owing
way: first th e species in eac h co mput ati onal celi are all owed to reac t as if th e syste m we re sp;ili,dl y
ho moge neo us fo r th e durati on of th e tim e step. Th e res ulting te mpera ture and spccies di~ t r ihu tillns arc th en
in itia l co nd iti ons for th c diffusion -co nvecti on problem , whi ch is so h-cd im pli citly for th e sa lli e tim-: ste p, A
stilT ODE solver is used for th e first part of th e calculatio n. Th e so h'cr Ill ay requ ire many int e l ll ;d stcps to
ca lculat e th e ho moge neo us reaction , The crror is fir st ord er in th e tim e-s tep if th e reac till n tilll ' is
compa rable to or grea te r th a n th e dilTusion-convecti on tim e a nd i ~ smalle r th a n this by a fac tm ..r the tim esca le ratio whe n th e reaction is fa st. Th cse statement s a rc tru e f(1I' :1I1 y sc he me whi ch is itse lr ~l:tI)1e for th e
convecti o n-diffusion problem .
The scheme has bec n tested by num e ri ca ll y co mputing so luti o ns to the three-di mension:d tim e-d c pendent
heat transfcr prob lcm with an Osee n now in th e sam e geo metry th at has a lso been solved exacth analyti ca lly.
Th e co mput cr tcmpe ratures agree \\'ith th e an alytical result s to bett er than 1/2 percen t for th e !!lld used .
Th e OD E solver is a package with it s own int crn al erro r co nt rols, \\'ilh a tolerance th <lt ca n he >0,1 by th e
user. \Ve require co nve rge nce in temperature to less th an n.s degrees Keh'in in our CO Ill PUt ;ltiol)'. No
adap ti ve grid schcmes is empl oyed. Th e gas ph ase grid is o ne mi ll illl eter on a side and a ti me ... te p of 4xlO-4
seco nds is empl oyed. This is cert ainly suffi cient to put th e fl ame in app roxima te ly Ih e ri!!-ht p"'("c' , alt ho ugh
details of th e name stru clure mi ght be lost. Howeve r, if fin e structure in the !lame leading. edg.l' i" wanted, a
co nsid erably more sophisti ca ted reacti on sche mc is also requ ired. Slich a st udy in the con text 0 1 .\ threedime nsional transie nt problem is we ll beyo nd th e curre nt state-o f-the-art.

235

Qu esti on (Subra ta Bhallach arj ee, Sa n Diego State): (1 ) How tl o yo u justify th e now be ing pote nti al as we ll
as creeping?
(2) In the abse nce of imposed convecti on, co uld the gas ph ase (co mbusti on produ ct) rad iati on ca use
significant fl ame cooling?
Answer: The ve locity fi e ld that is used to evaluate the convectio n term in the diffu sion-co nvect ion balance at
low Reynolds numbe rs is a potenti al fl ow in alm ost all of the existing flui d fl ow, heat transfer, and
co mbusti on lit erature. As a simpl e exampl e, the "Oseen fl ow" of any quantit y at low Reynolds num ber is the
leading ord er approxim ation to the solution for that qu antit y everywhere fo r a consta nt prope rty fluid. The
fl ow fie ld tha t is used in th e co nvecti on te rms is a uniform 110w which is tr ivially a potenti al fl ow. Th e
approxi mation is correct even wh e n th e qu antity being convect ed is th e flu id vo rti ci ty! Indeed, this is exactly
how the cl assical low Reynolds numbe r drag, heat tr ansfer, a nd combustio n result s are obt ain ed. The actual
ve locity fi elds are far more complex, but additional detail is not needed if only th e qu antities tha I satisfy the
Osee n eq uations are required. For furth er expl anation and add ition al references see Kushid a. et. al. (2).
Th e major role of radi atio n is in cooling th e condensed phase surface. It s impo rt a nce in th e gas phase is
unclea r, in pa rt because th e precise nature of th e gaseous co mbu sti o n produ cts is not yet we ll und erstood.
We int ent! to investiga te thi s furth er in the futur e.
REFERE NC ES:

or Comb usti on",

(1)

Wi chm an, I.S., "On th e Use of O perator Splilling Meth ods fo r th e Equ ati ons
Co mbu sti o n and Flame, Vo l. 3, pp. 2-10-252, (1991).

(2)

Kushid a, G . Baum , H .R ., Kas hiwagi, T.. and di Blasi, c., "H eat and Mass Transfe r from The rm ally
Degrad ing Thin Ce llul osic Materi als in a Microgravit y Environm e nt ", .1 . Hea t Tr ansfer. Vo l. 114.
-19-1-502, (1992) .

236

OPPOSEDMFLOW FLAME SPREADING IN REDUCED GRAVITY
Robert A. Altenkirch
Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering
Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi 39762
Subrata Bhattacharjee
Department of Mechanical Engineering
San Diego State University, San Diego, California 92182
Sandra L. Olson and Kurt Sacksteder
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

Introduction
Experimental results obtained in drop towers and in Space Shuttle based
experiments coupled with modelling efforts are beginning to provide information that
is allowing an understanding to be developed of the physics of opposed-flow flame
spread at reduced gravity where the spread rate and flow velocity are comparable and
of the role rlayed by radiative and diffusive processes in flame spreading in
microgravity ll-6J. Here we describe one Space Shuttle based experiment on flame
. spreadin~ in a quiescent environment, the Solid Surface Combustion Experiment,
SSCE l7], one planned microgravity experiment on flame spreading in a
radiatively-{:ontrolled, forced opposing flow environment, the Diffusive and Radiative
Transport in Fires Experiment, DARTFire [8], modelling efforts to support these
experiments, and some results obtained to date.
SSCE Apparatus
3
The SSCE apparatus consists of a sealed container, approximately 0.039 m in
volume, that is filled with a mixture of specified 02 and N2 percent by volume at a
prescribed pressure. The test specimens are either ashless filter paper (thin fuel), 0.165
mm thick, 10 cm long, and 3 cm wide, or polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA i thick
fuel), 0.318 cm thick, 2 cm long, and 0.635 cm wide. One end of the sample is ignited
using an electrically-heated nichrome wire.

For the thin fuel, three 0.127 mm Pt/Pt-Rh thermocouples are positioned along
the sample centerline. The first is embedded in the sample 5 cm from the ignition end
of the sample, the second is located 2.3 mm above the sample but 2.54 cm farther from
the ignitor, and the third is located 7.0 mm above the sample directly over the first.
For the thick fuel, one one thermocouple is positioned in the gas, and two in the solid,
one at the surface and one in depth. Two orthogonal views of the experiment are
recorded using 16 mm cin~ameras operating at 24 frames/s o
SSCE Results
Four experiments for the ashless :filter paper samples have been run to date, three

237

at 50%02j50%N2 by volume at 1.5 atm (STS--41, October 1990), 1.0 atm
(STS--40jSLS-1, June 1991), 2.0 atm (STS--43, August 1991), and one at
35%02/65% N2 at 1.5 atm (STS-50/USML-1, July 1992). Figure 1 shows four frames
from the side-view film for 50% 02 at 1.5 and 1.0 at m . Just after t he ignitor wire is
heated, ignition from nitrocellulose on the wi re results in a bri ght orange flash that
subsides once t he flame spreads away from the ignitor wire . The flame is spreading
from left to right , and t he t ime for each frame is the time after the first flame-like
image appears on the film .
As t he fl ame spreads , the soot radiation level in the t ail of the flame decreases in
bot h flames , and the lower pressure flame becomes entirely blue. Addi tionally, the
flame elongat es early in the spread process as the leading edge propagates fast er than
the t railing edge. Even t hough t he soot radiation changes with time and the flame
elongates just following ignition, the leading-edge spread rat e is almost fixed
immediately after t he flame leaves the ignitor. The spread rates for the first three
experiments are 0.358, 0.454, and 0.547 cm/s for 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 atm, respectively, at 50%
02' and for the 35 % 02 experiment it is 0.092 cmj s at 1.5 atm.
Thermocouple traces, as a function of location in the flame, for the surface and
gas temperatures, and the net heat flux to the solid (6] are shown in Fig. 2. The
leading edge of the flame is at x=O, which is fixed at the location of the peak net heat
flux. The surface temperature increases rapidly as the flame is approached and then
reaches a relatively steady temperature, which indicates the region of pyrolysis. The
temperature then rises, and as the tail of the flame passes the thermocouple, the
temperature quickly decreases until the residual char increases in temperature again as
fresh oxygen, which diffuses to the surface while products diffuse away, results in
surface oxidation.
Steady-8tate Modelling
Flame spread modelling is used to support the experimental effort.
A
comprehensive, steady-state, mathematical model developed along with the
experimental program has been presented elsewhere [3,4]. The conservation equations
in the gas for mass, fuel, oxygen, x and y momentum, and energy, including finite-rate
chemistry, and the energy and mass conservation equations in the solid, including
finite-rate , endothermic pyrolysis, are solved for the steady-state spread rate and
distribution of field variables . For the thin fuel, radiation from CO 2 and H20 is
considered [4], but the radiation fed back to the surface is generally assumed to balance
that reradiated from the surface so that a direct radiative coupling between the gas
and the solid is not presently considered (5].

°

2, 1.5
atm experiment in Fig. 3. The character of the gas-phase temperature at the leading
edge of the flame is predicted well, but the trailing edge of the flame is too far from the
surface, with little or no curvature toward the surface, to provide agreement with
experiment. Because the leading edge of the flame is responsible for establishing the
spread rate, reasonable agreement between measured and predicted spread rate is
obtained, the measured values, given above, for the 50% 02 experiments being 0.358,
Some computed results are compared to experimental results for the 50%

0.454, 0.547 cm/s for 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 atm, respectively, compared to predicted values of
0.360, 0.417, 0.450 cm/s. Both the measured and predicted spread rates increase with
238

pressure; without gas-phase radiation, the predicted spread rate, which is
approximately a factor of two higher than experiment (0.704 cm/s) at 1.0 atm, is
almost independent of pressure, although it declines slightly with an increase in
pressure.
For thin fuels, radiative effects are important at low opposing flow velocities,
decreases in flow velocity causing a decrease in spread rate and possible extinction [91.
As the flow velocity is increased, the effects of radiation become unimportant, with
extinction at high flow velocities occurring via blowoff. While thick fuel experiments
have not been completed yet, modelling of flame spread over thick fuels has progressed,
although the effects of radiation have been confined to surface reradiation [10]. For
these fuels, surface radiative effects are important for all flow velocities because as the
flow velocity is increased from very low values to very high values, the radiative effects
compared to the conduction effects do not decrease as they do for thin fuels.
DARTFire Experiment
Experimental and modelling results, obtained in conjunction with the SSCE, show
that radiative effects are important in low-velocity, opposed-flow flame spreading at
reduced-gravity. Although in the SSCE the opposing flow is not controlled, because
the environment is quiescent, it is, in flame-fixed coordinates, the spread rate. In the
DARTFire experiment, which is described in a recently-<ieveloped Science
Requirements document [8], the fuel surface is subjected to various levels of an
external radiative flux, and the flame spreads into a low-velocity, forced-flow
boundary layer. Such a configuration will allow determination of those environments
that lead during flame evolution to sustained spreading or extinction and development
of a clear understanding of the interaction between the flow and radiation fields at
reduced gravity.
Unsteady Modelling
More recently, the steady-state model has been extended to include unsteady
effects [11,12] that allows flame characteristics to be computed from ignition onward.
While the spread rates measured in the SSCE are steady, which is understandable
because the flow field around the leading edge of the flame is established by the flame
itself and is relatively fixed independent of flame location, the trailing edge of the
flame exhibits some unsteady behavior. For DARTFire, the flame spread is inherently
unsteady because the flame spreads into a thinning boundary layer in which the flow
field changes with flame position.
Conclusions
Results of gas and surface temperature and spread rate measurements in flame
spread over a thin cellulosic fuel in a 50% °2/50% N2 quiescent environment obtained
aboard recent missions of the Space Shuttle show steady spreading, and, when coupled
with steady-state modelling, the importance of radiation. Spread rate increases with
pressure through the effects of pressure on gas radiation, the optical depth of the lower
pressure flames and the attendant heat loss being greater than at higher pressure.
Computed results agree with experimental results near t he leading edge of t he flame,
but additional refinement of the model is needed in order to describe accurately the
trailing edge of the flame and more accurately the coupling of gas and surface radiative
processes. Development of an experiment in which the radiative and flow environment
will be carefully controlled is proceeding as well as the development of unsteady flame
239

spread models.
Acknowledgements
Support for the SSCE effort is provided through NASA contract NAS3-23901 with
starting date December 1984, and for DARTFire through NASA cont ract NCC3-221
with starting date June 1991.
References
1.

Olson, S.L . (1991) . Combust. Sci. Technol. 76, 233-249.

2.

Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R.A., Olson, S.L., and Sotos , R.G. (1991) . Heat
Transfer to a Thin Soli d Combustible at Zero-Gravity, Journal of Heat Transfer
113, 67 0~ 7 6 .

3.

Bhattacharjee, S. and Altenkirch, R.A. (1 991). Combust. Flame 84, 160-169.

4.

Bhattacharjee, S. and Altenkirch, R.A. (1 991). Tw enty-Third S ymp osium
(International) on Combustion, The Combustion Instit ute, Pitts burgh, pp .
1627- 1633.

5.

Bhattacharjee, S. and Altenkirch, R .A. (1992). A Comparison of Theoretical and
Experimental Results in Flame Spread over Thin Condensed Fuels in a
Quiescent,
Microgravity
Environment,
Tw enty-Fourth
Symposium
(Internationa0 on Combustion, The combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, to appear.

6.

Bhattacharjee, S. , Altenkirch, R.A . and Sacksteder, K. (1992). Implications of
Spread Rate and Temperature Measurements in Flame Spread Over a T hin Fuel
in a Quiescent , 11icrogravity , Space-Based Environment, Combust. Sci. Te chnol.,
t o appear.

7.

Altenkirch, R.A. (1985). Science Requirements Document for the Solid Surface
Combustion Experiment, NASA Contract NAS3-23901 Report.

8.

Altenkirch, R.A. , Olson, S.L. and Bhat tacharjee, S. (1992). Science Requirements
for the Diffusive and Radiative T ransport in Fires Experiment, NASA Contract
NCC3-221 Report .

9.

Altenkirch, R.A. and Bhattacharjee, S. (1990). AIAA Prog. Astro. Aero. 130,
723-740.

10.

West, J., Bhattacharjee, S. and Altenkirch, R.A. (1992). Surface Radiation
Effects on Flame Spread over Thermally Thick Fuels in an Opposing Flow, 11
ASME/ A ICHE Nation al Heat Transfer Conference.

11.

Bullard, D.B. (1992) Modeling Unsteady Flame Propagation over Thermally
Thick Solid Fuels in a Microgravity Environment, MS Thesis, Mississippi State
University.

12.

Bullard, D.B., Tang, 1., Altenkirch, R.A. and Bhattacharjee, S. (1992) .
Unsteady Flame Spread over Solid Fuels in Microgravity, Committee on Space
Research W orld Space Co ngress, also A dvances in Space Research, submitted.
240

3.5 s

16.5 s

4.0 5

Fig. 1.

9.1 s

8.4 s

16.3

21.95

25.4 s

5

Four frames from 16 mm film of flame spread over ashless filter paper in
the SSCE at 50% 02 at 1.5 atm (top) and 1.0 atm (bottom). Times are
time from the first appearance of a flame-like image on the film.
~

241

Color Plate F-2

~

---.-- ---- STSAO

e

..

('

.....

81m)

0..,.; ... TlIJft AFP

- - - I n A ' (U atm)
··· __ ····_·· IT$A> C2 ataal

~

m

...
~

D

,.

;

,

~

(;
~

(;
~

l..5

~
...

U
(

. 2$

.l.l

·20

,

·10

....

l.l

r/

lJ

i

!
,

.
-

CI

~~

U
I
.2$

c

..

n-.ocouple: 7.0 mm f'r'OfII IUt1ace

"E
~

~
G

...

...

.,

,
·
·
.·

:to

\

-

I

·····---····· ITS4' C2

--ITU1

I tm)

(U Itm)
a lm)

II

1.I

'
I,\
iI

I ;
i \

10

I
,

z

·s

50"1. Ory"'n. Thin UP
----- . -- ITS'O (1

,

20

\
·,0
x; em

~

·S

em

i
i
,

2S

Ii::

I

0

..

·'0

"
~

x, em

Measured temperature and heat flux profiles for spread over ashless filter
paper in the SSCE at 50% 02 '

~.

temperature .1

mm

)"=2.3

4..5

,.. •
'"
-:: :u
E

---

$T$41..Ga.a

T-.a.,.

•

- - - n-y

·

" :u

~
z

;;

lJ

~

·
~
·

lJ

;;

c.

~
...

·10

I,

~

.

..

. )j

Ii,

~.

"0

D

Fig. 2

......---.-....

· 20

><

·20

'~!

em

lO

~

O.yoe n. Thin AFf'

....,

~
...

~

Q

....

5O'W.

tUNC •

)
" ---".-- - '" STS40 ('
_
_ _ ITS.1 (1.J .tm)
.............. ITSAl C2

a.

III

..

......

~

Q.

;<

OlIO

D

l.l

~

The~P": U

U

Co

l..'I

E

H
I

·'0

.,

G

0

C

8

10

0

>-

A

l.l

.. em

Fig. 3.

U
H
I

·10

.,

a

G

c

.. an

Comparison between measured and computed temperatures for spread over
ashless filter paper in the SSCE at 50% 02 and 1.5 atm.

242

COMMENTS
Question (Howard R. Baum, NIST): The role of gas phase radiation in these problems may indeed be
important. However, while the local emission can be roughly approximated in a 2-dimensional simulation, the
feedback to the condensed phase is inherently 3-dimensional. This is due to the limited width of the fuel
sample and the rapid dccay of the temperature and combustion product species in the lateral direction.
Answer: Dr. Baum 's points are well-taken, and, as he indicates, there are two separate issues to address
here. In some earlier preliminary work (1,2), we found that the Planck mean absorption coefficient as
defined here is not particularly sensitive to sample width. Values from "two-dimensional" computations,
which have a 3-D aspect to them in that lines of sight throughout a 2-pi steradian solid angle are considered
in calculating fluxes on the computational domain, do not change much as the sample width is reduced to a
range in which we are interested, as long as some physically reasonable temperature and species profiles are
used in the lateral direction when radiation loss from the sides of the flame is considered. Consequently, the
"two-dimensional" radiation model for the gas-phase emission appears to be a reasonable approximation.
In considcring radiation fee dback to the surface th o ugh , which we have not done here but have rather taken
the feedback to balance the surface reradiation, 3-D effects are inherent. While the 2-D model accounts for
reasonable overall radiative loss from the gas-phase, the fraction of gas radiation fed back to the surface
dcpends on the dctails of how the rauiation loss though the siucs of the ilame is treated. Wc plan to address
this inherent 3-D effect in an approximate way in future 2- D computations.
REFERENCES:
I.

Altenkirch. R.A. et al. (1991). February through March. NASA Tcchnical Progress Report on NASA
Contract NAS3-23901.

2.

Bhattacharjee, S. anu Altcnkirch, R .A. (199 l). Three-Dimensional Radiative Effects in OpposeuFlow Flame Spread Modeling, Central States Section "'ceting of The Combustion Institute meeting.

243

COMBUSTION OF SOLID FUEL IN VERY LOW SPEED OXYGEN STREAMS
James S. T'ien,' Kurt R. Sacksteder,t Paul V. Ferkul,' and Gary D. Grayson'
' Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106
tNASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland , Ohio 44135

1. Introduction
In reduced gravity, the combustion of solid fuel in low-speed flow can be studied. The flame behavior in this
low-speed regime will flll a void in our understanding of the flow effect on combustion. In addition, it is
important for spacecraft fire safety considerations. In this work. modeling and experimental work on low-speed
forced-concurrent-flow flame spread are carried out In addition. experiments on reduced-gravity buoyant-flow
flame spread are perfonned.

2. Low Speed Forced Flow
2.1 Concurrent-Flow Flame Spread Model (1]
The model considers two-dimensional. steady flame spread in concurrent flow over a thin solid. Because of its
thinness. the fuel bed can burn through. The flame could therefore reach a constant length provided that a .
constant (and equal) flame tip velocity. pyrol ysis front velocity. and fuel burnout rate. can be obtained in the
low-speed concurrent flow environment.
The flame is assumed to be laminar because of its small size and low velocity. The gas-phase fluid mechanical
treatment is more comprehensive than most works in the past In the flame base region (where the upstream
flow is seen first). strearnwise heat and mass diffusion is included. This. together with fmite-rate. gas-phase
chemical kinetics, enables us to examine the question of flame stabilization and extinction. The elliptic treatment
of this flame stabilization zone entails the full Navier-Stokes equations. On the other hand, to save
computational time. a boundary layer approximation is employed in the downstream region. The two zones are
coupled at an appropriate gas-phase location. They are also coupled indirectly through the solid by energy
exchange. A simplified solid fuel model is used. The solid is assumed to be thennally thin and to pyrolyze
according to a one-step Arrhenius law with no char and tar fonnation. A solid-surface radiative-loss tetm is
included which becomes critically important in the low-speed flammability limit Because of the coupling
between elliptic and parabolic regions and between the gas and solid phases. the numerical solutions require
many iterations and are computationally intensive; they are carried out using the Cray X-MP Supercomputer at
the NASA Lewis Research Center.
Although the model has been fonnulated for a mixed forced and buoyant flow. extensive computations have been
perfonned for purely forced flow only. using oxygen mole fraction and free-stream velocity as parameters. Fig.
1 gives all the points calculated and the extinction boundary. Some of the important results are summarized
below.
The extinction boundary consists of a quenching and a blowoff branch similar to those in
stagnation-point flow [2] and in opposed-flow flame spreading [3]. The quenching limit is due to the
surface radiative loss. Without radiative loss, the model predicts no low-speed limit Fig. 2 shows the
maximum computed flame temperatures. In all cases, the maximum temperature decreases with flow
velocity. especially near the quench limit The flame spread rate decreases monotonically with flow
velocity. as expected (Fig.3).
Flames quench at low speed by shrinking in size. Near-limit flames remain stabilized in the fuel
burnout region, as shown in Fig. 4. This flxed stabilization is in contrast to flame blowoff at higher

245

Preceding Page Blank

speed where the flame cannot be stabilized in the fuel burnout region. Extinction is reached when the
flame is blown downstream. This illustrates one of the distinctions in flame extinguishment between
quenching and blowoff. This difference becomes clear in -a two-dimensional analysis but is obscure in
one-dimensional stagnation-point flames. The reactivity contours shown in Fig. 4 resemble the visible
blue flame seen in experiment (take w=lO-4 g/cm 3/sec for example), which will be discussed in the next
section.
Using finite-rate kinetics enables us to examine the integrated flux of fuel vapor crossing any vertical
plane. Far downstream, the fuel-flux stops changing (because the reaction becomes frozen), providing a
measure of fuel escaping the flame. The fraction of fuel not consummed in the flame increases
dramatically at lower speeds because of the increased importance of flame-tip quenching. Additionally,
the variation of escaped fuel vapor is not monotonic with flow velocity.
2.2 Forced Concurrent Flow Flame Spread Experiments [4]
Low-speed concurrent-forced-flow experiments were conducted at Lewis Research Center's 5-second drop tower
using thin tissue paper Kimwipe) as the solid fuel. The relative flow was generated using a sample translation
device in a total of twenty-seven drop tests. In these tests, the flow velocity was varied from less than 1 cm/s to
5 cm/s and the oxygen concentration in nitrogen (at normal atmospheric pressure) from 30% down to extinction.
Color cine films were made of the flames.
While in most tests the leading edge of the fuel receded steadily as it was burnt following the ignition transient,
the downstream flame tip propagation was unsteady. Flames grew in length (after the ignition transient) at
higher oxygen concentrations and relative flow velocities, but shrunk at lower concentrations and velocities. In
higher-speed flows , in normal gravity, flame length has always been observed to grow after ignition [5]. The
shrinking flames observed in these microgravity tests could be quenching, but the slow evolution of the flame
length in the 5 second test time did not allow enough time to observe their eventual fate. Alternatively, the
small, slowly evolving flames may be indicative of near-steady configurations of flames in very-low-speed
concurrent flows. Fig. 6 (the color photos are grouped together) shows a comparison of flames at approximately
5 cm/sec relative concurrent flow at three different oxygen concentrations. The shape of the 15% oxygen
concentration case can also be compared favorably with the computed reaction contours (e.g. 10-4 g/cm3/sec)
shown in Fig. 4 for the same test condition.
The measured spread rates of the flame base, the leading edge of the fuel at which burnout occurs, are similar to
the computed values shown in Fig. 3. However, spread rates at high oxygen concentrations and high
relative-flow velocities are lower experimentaJly at the end of the drop while the rates at low oxygen
concentrations and low relative-flow velocities are higher experimentally. These observations are consistent with
the suggestion that the flames might not have had sufficient time to reach their fmal configuration in the
available 5 seconds.
A flammability map, based upon the status of flames at the end of 5 seconds of microgravity, has been drawn
and is similar to Fig. 1. No detailed comparison can be made because steady flames have not been achieved
experimentally. It is clear that even for a thin fuel such as Kimwipes, which provide ample steady flamespread
data in opposed-flow configurations, longer microgravity duration is needed to satisfactorily determine flame
spread rates and extinction limits in concurrent flow.
3. Buoyant-Flow Flame Spread in Reduced-Gravity Experiments
Flame spread fn buoyant flow under reduCed-gravitational conditions has been observed using the NASA KC-135
aircraft flying parabolic trajectories at approximately l!3rd, 1/6th, and 1/10th normal earth gravity levels. The test
apparatus includes provisions for controlled ignition energy, color-schlieren flame imaging and three dimensional
measurements of the local acceleration levels. Tests were conducted in 0iN2 mixtures from 18% oxygen down
to extinction (of the same thin Kimwipe tissues used in our other tests) at normal and reduced pressures for
upward (concurrent flow) flame propagation; and at normal pressure for downwaro (opposed flow) propagation.

246

3.1 Downward Flame Spread and Extinction
Schlieren images of flames spreading in buoyant, opposed flow showed steady propagation in oxygen
concentrations below the normal-gravity flammability limit. At each oxygen concentration (18, 16, and 15%
oxygen) spread rates decrease with increasing acceleration, though the difference between l/IOth g and l/6th g is
small. Tests conducted at 14% oxygen showed flame propagation at liIOth g, and a blowoff extinction was
observed during the aircraft pullout maneuver to approximately 2g. Flames at higher acceleration levels and
14% oxygen did not appear to survive the ignition transient. Fig. 5 shows a flammability map using acceleration
level and normal-atmospheric-pressure oxygen concentration as parameters. The solid line gives the high-g
blowoff boundary. The low-g extinction boundary, which cannot be detennined accurately in the aircraft
experiment, is indicated by the shaded curve. Fig. 7 shows schlieren images of the downward spreading flames
at 15% oxygen at two reduced-gravity levels.
3.2 Upward Flame Spread
Schlieren images of flames spreading in buoyant, concurrent flows show propagation of flames down to normalatmospheric-pressure oxygen concentrations of 12%, in both 1I6th and l/3rd g. A single test at l/Wth g did not
result in a propagating flame at 12% oxygen, while another at 14% did.
At normal atmospheric pressure, the upward spreading flames were characterized by thennallflame plumes that
become unsteady downstream of the flame stabilization zone. The tissue-paper fuel tended to curl, particularly
in the normal pressure tests, disturbing the bonom of the flame. Fig. 8 a and b show two parts of an upward
propagating flame at 15% oxygen in 1/6th g as they passed by the single schlieren window. In Fig. 8a, the
unsteady/unstable plume is shown, while in Fig. 8b, the bouom of the flame is shown stabilized near the lowest
point on the fuel surface.
Tests were conducted at reduced pressure and showed the existence of low-pressure limits. In the small number
of tests conducted, the pressure limits were not detennined with precision. At reduced pressure the flame plumes
were more laminar and the fuel defonned more slowly during burning. Fig. 8c shows the downstream plume of
a 15% oxygen, 0.5 atmosphere pressure flame at 1/6th g. Below, in Fig. 8d, the stabilized bottom of the same
flame is shown.

4. Future Plans
Although surface radiative loss is included in the current model and has proven to be important in low-speed
flows, gaseous radiation has been neglected. In stagnation point flow, gas radiation is found to alter the lowspeed quenching limit for one-dimensional stationary flames. In concurrent flow gaseous radiation is likely to be
more important because the flame is longer. Comparison with experiment also shows that without gas radiation
the model overpredicts the flame length. The inclusion of gaseous radiation in the model is the logical next step
and will complete our understanding of radiative effects on flame spreading over solid fuels in low speed flows.
At the same time thermally-thick solid fuel needs to be treated in the theory (presently, we have dealt with
thennally-thin fuel only). The new elements that need to be added will include solid-phase heat transfer, fuel
geometry change and an unsteady flame growth process.
Experimentally we will also begin to test thicker fuels in low-speed flows. Because of the limitations of
microgravity time in ground-based facilities, steady state is not expected, even were burnout possible. In order
for the results to be useful, a controlled ignition process will be extended to thick fuels. The ignition transient
experiments and related modeling will lead to a rational design of a space-based experiment required to obtain
concurrent-flow flame spreading data in the very low-speed regime.
Because of the flammabili ty limit data we have obtained for both low-speed forced flow and buoyant flow in
reduced gravity, we also hope to contribute to the reevaluation of flammmability test methods for spacecraft
materials.

247

REFERENCES
1. Ferkul, P. Y.: A Model of Low-Speed Concurrent-Flow Flame Spread over a Thin Solid Fuel, Ph.D. Thesis,
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
expected October 1992.

2. T'ien, J. S., Combustion and Flame, 65, I, pp. 31-34 (1986).
3. Olson, S. L. Ferkul, P. V., and T'ien, J. S., 22nd Sym. (lnt.) on Combustion, The Combustion Inst., pp.
1213-1222 (1988).
4. Grayson, G. D.: An Experimental Study of Low-Speed Concurrent Flow Flame Spread over a Thin Fuel,
M.S. Thesis, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland,Ohio (1991).

5. Loh, H. T. and Fernandez-Pello, A. C.: Flow Assisted Flame Spread over Thermally Thin Fuels, proceedings
of the First International Sym. on FIre Science, Hemisphere (1986).

21

o

o

OOOOOCIl>OO

20

..--.
~19

0

0

0

Steady Flame
Extinction

0

0

x

c

·0

~18
0

'-

u... 1 7
Q)

o

0

0

0

Quench i ng

·0

Branch

::.:E 1 6

~

C

0

Q)

Ol

~15
0

-

00

0

0
0

14

o CD<

.-

~

______ .x~ ~ Blawoff
Branch

13
10 0

1.5

2

2.5

•

J

5

6

7

8

10 1

1.5

2

Free Stream Velocity (cm/s)

Fig. 1

Extinction Boundary of a Thin Solid Fuel in Concurrent Flow

248

- - ------ ..

- - - - - - - - -

o

- -

- --

N

'f

It?

I::J

1:-=
E

en

I:::

I·~

o

I~

..-... .- -

1-

1.2

,m

Vl

I~

'-...

1.2
01

E

u

'-'" CD
C1)
...-

0

0:::
"0

"
o

0

C1)
L-

III

-.t

,.,

a.

(f)

N

o

217.
V 197.
6 177.
o 157.
o 147.

If)

o

02.
02.
02.
02.
02.

10l

To.l = 7 .34
TO.I = 6 .84
To.l = 6.32
TO.I = 5 .79
To.t = 5 .51

I·~
.c",
10;'.::

It?

/~ .s
:l...J

r:

a

2

~~Wk____~~~~~~wu____~
o
2
3 4
2

1

Fig. 3

!o

2.7em/s

4

16
cv

5e m /s

([~
-1

4

.

,

0

: 00

x

0

0

~
~

Q'I
0

C

cv

U

L-

9

cv15
a..
c

.
:

C1)

!:[~,
4

-

-<-'

10em/s

-1

Flame Spread Rate

a

t§2

-)

Q'I

>..

x

0

9

14

14

15.Sem/s

(fLt.l:l~~~~~:~~~~~~?:~,~.~
-1

2

Maximum Flame Temperature
17

~2r

4

10
Relative Velocity (cm/s)

10
Relative Velocity (cm/s)

.
Flg . 2

3

4

9

x (em)

14

o

Steady Flame
x Extinct ion

13 L - - - - - L _ . . . . . . L _ - L - - - ' - - - '
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
9

Fig. 4

ReactivitY .Contours at lSr. Oxygen
from Quenching to Blowoff
(Outermost contour is 10 -6 glcm 3 Is;
a factor of~eparates contours)

249

Fig. 5

Extinction Boundary for
Kimwipe in Buoyant Opposed
Flows (earth: g = 1)

--

15%

18%

25%

1I10th g

1I6th g

Fig. 7 Downward Spreading in 15% Oxygen, 1 Atm
Flame Shapes at Scm/sec
Relative Concurrent Flow

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8 Upward Spreading in 15% Oxygen, 1 atm (a,b), 0.5 atm (c,d)

250

See

Cblor Plate F-3

I-

I
A FUNDAMENTAL STUDY OF SMOLDERING COMBUSTION IN
MICROGRAVITY
Carlos Fern andez-Pello, Principal Investigator
Patrick J. Pagni, Co-Principal Investigator
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720

ABSTRACT
A research program is being conducted to study smoldering combustion in microgravity. The program's
final objective is to design and conduct smolder expcrimenL<; in a space based laboratory , which will complement nOffilal gravilY ones, and that will help to: increase the current fundamental understanding of
smoldering; predict smolder behavior in a space-based installation; and prevent and control smolder originated, ground or space based, fires .
I. INTRODUCTION

Smoldering is defined as a non-Ilami ng, surface combustion reaction, that propagates through the interior
of porous combustible materials. The propagation of the smolder reaction is a complex phenomena
involving processes related to the transport of heat and mass in a porous media, together with surface
chemical reactions. Smoldering is a weakly reacting phenomena, and generally propagates very slowly.
The produCL<; of smoldering combustion are, however, often toxic and consequently hazardous . Smoldering can also play an important role in the initiation of unwanted fires because of the potential rapid transition from the slow smoldering reaction to the flaming combustion of the material. Furthermore. smoldering is often difficult to detect and suppress because it may take place in the material interior and the
porosity of the material may prevent the access of the extinguishing agent to the reaction zone. Thus.
understanding of the physical and chemical mechanisms controlling smoldering is important not only
because smoldering is a fundamental combustion process. but because such understanding can be critical
to the prevention and control of unwanted fires.
Gravity influences smoldering by affecting the transport controlling propagation mechanisms, the stability of the propagation front, the structure of the porous material and the now of particulates through the
material. Conducting smolder experiments in microgravity will simplify the study of the phenomena by
eliminating some of these effects. Furtheffilore, to date there is no experimental information about smoldering behavior in microgravity. This is imponant since such infoffilation and complementary theoretical

251

foundation are necessary to asses the fire risk of a space based installation.
The project's overaU objective is the understanding and prediction of smoldering combustion under normal and microgravity conditions. This is accomplished by conducting smolder experiments on the ground
and in a space based laboratory, and developin g theo retical model s of the process.
II. RESEARCH PROGRESS

II.1 Normal Gravity Smolderi ng:
A series of ex periments of forced flow smoldering, opposed and forward , have been conducted. In addition to providing information about smoldering, the experiments have the objective of detennining the
effect of buo yancy in the smolder process. This is accomplished by comparing the experimental results
fo r upward and downward smoldering, and by comparing the data with the predictions of theoretical
models of the process. Measurements conducted in these experiments included the smolder propagation
velocity and the reaction zone temperature as a function of some of the parameters that affect them . The
data are correlated with non-dimensional parameters that arc derived from a theoretical analysis of the
problem.
The experimental appa ratus consisL<; or a square cross section duct comain ing the fuel and through
whi ch the oxidize r gas 1I0ws to produce a one-dimens ional , forced 1I 0w, smolder, and the supporting
instrumentation. The test section comaining the porous fuel consists of a 0.3 m long vertical duct with a
O. 15m side square cross section. \!etered air 1I0ws into the test section through a diffuser and a 50 mm
long settling section filled with glass beads. All the tesL<; arc conducted with 150mm side cubes of open
ce ll, unretarded. white Ilexible polyurethane foam. The rate of smolder propagation is obtained from the
temperature histories of eight Chromel-Alumcl thermocouples 0.8 mm in diameter that are embedded at
predetermined positions in the porous ruel with thei r junction placed in the fuel centerline. The smolder
velocity is calculated from the time lapse of the reac tion zone arrival to twO consecutive thennocouples,
and the known distance between the thermocouples . These thermocouples are also used to measure the
reaction zone temperature which is charact eril.ed by a maximum in the temperature profile.
All the experi ments showed that three I.ones wi th distinct smo lder characteristi cs can be identified along
the foam sam ple. An initial !.One nca r the igniter where the smo lder process is inll uenced by heat from the
igniter, an intermediate /.O ne whe re smolder is relativ ely free rrom ex ternal elTccts . and a third zone near
the sample end that is strongly affected by the externa l env ironmenl. The smolder reaction propagation
velocity and temperature ge nerally have a direct correspondence and va ry in each one of these three
I.ones.
Opposed Smolder: Characteristics results of opposed smolder are presented in Fig. I, which shows the
variati on of the downward smolder propagation ve locity through the sample length for several representative opposed air now velocities. Tests we re also cond ucted at other now velocities, but the results are not
presented to avoid crowding of the ligure. The data is the average from live tests, and the error bars
describe the maximum deviaLions from the me~U1 . These data plus othe r obtained wi th different foam
lengths, initial temperature and orientation are correlated in Fig. 2 in terms of a non-dimensional smolder
velocity that is derived fro m a theoretical analysis or the problem previously developed under this grant.
The analysis basically balances the energy needed to heat the foam to the smolder temperature and the
energy generated by the smolder reaction, which is assumed to be in thermod ynamic equilibrium. By
assuming that all the oxygen is consumed at the reaction zone (smolder is oxygen limited), the analysis
predicts that the smolder velocity is proportional to the mass flux of oxygen at the reaction zone. The
mass flux of oxidizer to the reaction zone is obtained in its tum from an analysis of the mixed, forced and
free. now through the porous fuel. From the corre lation of Fig. 2 it is seen that the model predicts well the
measurements, except at cond itions were extinction or trans ition to flaming occur. In these limiting conditions solid or gas chemical kinetics play an important role, and the smolder velocity is no longer singly
controlled by the oxid izer mass nux. An interesting result of co rrelating the experimental data with the

252

model prediction is that the effect of buoyancy can be extracted by simply comparing the pure fo rced
flow and mi xed flow correlations. Such comparison shows that buoyancy has an inl1uence over the hole
range o f velocities tested.
These results point out to a smolder process that is controlled by the competition between the supply of
oxidizer to the reaction zone and the loss of heat from the reaction zone. For example analyzing the data
in zone II of Fig. 1. it is seen that at very low !low velocities ( < 0.5 mm/s) the smolder propagation velocity is very small. indicating the prese nce of a weak smolder reaction. As the air flow velocity is
increased. the smolder reaction ve locity first increase. reaches a maximum (at approximately 2.5 mm/s),
and then stan to decrease. The initial increase in the smolder temperature and velocity is due to the
increased supply of oxidizer to the reaction zone which enhances the heat production. as predicted by the
model. As the air velocity is increased funher. the heat generated at the reaction and the convective heat
losses eventually balance each other and the smolder reacti on velocity reaches a maximum . If the air (low
rate is increased even funher the heat losses ove rcome the heat generation and the smolder temperature
and velocity start to decrease. Fo r air flow rales larger than 2.8 mm/s. the heat losses dominate and cause
the weakening and final extinction of the smolder reaction. The above discussed contrOlling mechanisms
also apply to the other two zones. although the external effects modify somewhat the balance between
them .
Forward Smoldering: The measurements show that in this type of smolder. as the now velocity is
increased the smolder velocity increases but the reaction temperature decreases. regardless of the sample
location . These trends are the result of the hot post-combustion gases being convected ahead of the
smolder fronL. Although they preheat the virgi n material downstream of the reaction favoring the propagation of the smolder reaction . they also dilute the oxidizer ahead of the reaction weakening it and reducing its temperature . The smolder veloci ty data are also correlated well with the predictions of a theo reti cal model of this mode of smolder. For upward smo ld ering. transition to !laming was observed to occu r in
the char at the zone closer to the sample end and for air velocities of 15 mm/sec or larger. Comparison
between upward and downward smoldering also showed that the effect of gravity takes place for air flow
rates smaller than 3 mm/sec.
Transition to Flaming: ExperimeI1ls arc currently oeing conducted to study smoldering in the presence
of a gas/solid interface. and the phenomenon of the transition to flaming . The expcrimenL<; are conducted
in a test facility that includc!'> a small ~cale comb ustion tunnel and thc !'>u[)poning instrumentation. The
tunnel test section is 0.0 1m long with a cross seclion 0. 15m wide and 0.07m deep. and is venically
oriented. Prc-metered comprcssed air Ilows through a sctLling chamber and a converging nozzle prior to
entering the test section. Foam samples with a O.15m side square cross section and with variable lengths
are mounted flush in one of the test secLion walls. A lIat type igniter is mounted in the upstream end of the
(ue! sample. The experiment s show that transition LO Ilaming is very sensitive to sample size. probably
because of heat losses to the surrounding ambient. Samples with lengthS smaUer lhan O.15m showed a
smolder reaction that would propagate upward at an increased velocity. and that would became holter and
produce considerable amounts or smoke. but that eventually would extinguish itself apparenLly because of
the dilution or the available oxidizer by the post-combustion gases. For samples larger than 0.15 m and at
relatively low flow velociLies (of the ordcr of 0.3 m/s). transition lO flaming is consistenLly observed initially in the upper pan of the foam near the interface. after which the whole sample is rapidly involved in
!lames and bums completely. A parametric study is currently being conducted to study the mechanisms
controlling the transition to Ilaming.

11.2 Ground Based Microgravity Smoldering:
A series of smolder experiments were conducted at the ASA LeRC 2.2 seconds drop tower to observe
trends in the ignition characteristics of the foam. and to attempt to infer how smoldering will behave in
microgravity. The parameter analyzed was the Limc derivative of the smolder reaction temperature,
because the temperature itself. o r the smolde r veloci ty. do nOl change enough in 2.2 seconds to observe
significant differences. The tcmpe rature gradients measured in the ("oam ahead of the reaction zone

253

showed that microgravity favors the initial heating of the virgin fuel by the smolder reac tion , and that the
upper range of flo w velocities at which buoyancy plays a signi ficant role on smoldering is around 3 mm/s,
in approximate agreement w ith the normal gravity experiments.
A series of oppo sed flow , downward and upward . 'smoldering experiments were also cond ucted in a
NASA KC-1 35 aircraft (30 s of micro-g ["or up to 40 parabolas) to observe the effects of the variation of
the grav ity on the smolder process . The ex perimental apparatus is a small scale vers ion of that described
in the normal grav ity forced lIow experiments. Although the microgravity period was too shon to study
stead y smoldering in micro -gravity , the tests provided initial information about the process and permitted
the observation of smolder trends as the grav ity changes. The tests also complement the Drop Tower tests
summarized above. As with those tests, the variation of the smolder reaction temperature with time was
the parameter used to infer the effect of gravit y on the smolder process.
A characteristic example of the measurements made is given in Fig. 3, where the variation with time of
the temperature in the three zones of the fo am identified above (ncar igniter, middle, and free end) is plotted together with the gravity level variation. The resulL<; show that buoyancy affects the temperature differently according to the location of the measurement with respect to the reac tion zone. In the vi rgin foam
ahead of the reaction zone and in the char behind of it. the temperature increases as the grav it y is reduced .
but the opposite is observed around the reaction zone. This indicates that buoyancy affects both the
species tran spo rt and transkr of hea t to and from the reaction I.onc. A t the reaction !.One the former is
dominant. which resu lts in a decrease of the smolder temperature in microgravit y. Away from the reaction zone th e latter is dominant and the temperature increases due to the lack of co nvective coo ling. All
these crfec ts are less noticeable as the !low veloci ty is increased. and as the reaction propagates toward
the sample interior confirming that buoyancy is important at low !low ve locities and near the sample
ends.

11.3 Space Rased Experiment :
Work on thi s aspec t of the program has included the design of a small scale smolder
successfulJ y ca rried out in the glove box in Spacelab on USML- I , during the June 25
sion 0 1 the Space Shu ttl e Columhia. and th e prepara tion of the Science Requirement
'
ceptual Design Review for a larger sca le space based expe rim ent to be cond ucted in
0 1 the gas-can.' of the Space Shut tl e ill the mid -nineties.

experiment that was
- July II , 1992 misDocument and Conthe mid-deck or one

The glovebox experi ment hardware consists 01 lour modules each co ntaining an instrum ented fuel sample . \\ ith an embedded igniter and an internal Ian to induce forced convection . The test variablcs of the
experiment are the ign iter geometry and the co nvec ti ve env ironment. Throu gh the use of an axial igniter
and a plate igniter. both radial and ax ial :molder is investi ga ted . For each igniter geometry, a test is conducted with a quiescent environment and wi th a low veloc ity /l ow, for a lotal or rour test conditions . The
modules are scaled . Iexan hoxes, nominall y O.15m by O.20m. filled w ith air. A cy linder of open -cell
pol yurethane loam. 50mm in diameter and ~O mm lenglh is positioned in the center of the box. The
igniters are resis ti vel y heated ce rami c clements. Tile fuel sample is ins tru me nted with 6 thermocouples,
located at vario us positions to measure tile smolder react ion temperature and ilS propagation throughout
the sample. The temperature and igniter current measurements are displayed on two digital displays and
recorded w ith a video camera.
Currentl y we are in the proce:s of anal yzing the data from the experiment, and we expect to completed
the analysis within the next l"ew months. However. preliminary lemperature histories such as that of Fig.
. .L which correspond to a test with the axial igniter and the ran on, ind icate that although incipient smolder
occurred. and seemed to be more intense than in normal gravity. the smolder reaction itself was not selfsus tained and did not propagate beyond the vicinity
the igniter. A possible reason for this is that the
incipient smolder reaction chokes itselr with its own prod ucts by diluting the surrounding air. In microgravity. diffusion of oxidizer toward the reaction zone seem to be too slow to counteract this dilution process. Although we be lieve that for the same igniter conditions the smolder reaction would not propagate

or

254

in normal gravity either. we think that this will be due to convective cooling effects and no to chemical
reaction effects.

III. FUTURE RESEARCH PROGRAM
The fu ture research program maintains the general guidelines established during the current research program. It contains two major tasks; one that concentrates on the space based experiments; and the other on
the ground based experiments , and on the development and verification of theoretical models.

111.1 Ground Based Smoldering Experiments
IlL!.! Effect of Buoyancy on Forced Flow Smoldering
The expe rimen ts on the effect of buoyancy on forced /l ow smoldering will be continued. A parametric
study will be made of the influence of parameters such as the fuel type and void fraction, the oxidizer
oxygen concentration. ambient temperature and pressure, on the gravity effects. Experiments to study the
effects of oxidizer tempe rature and oxygen concentration will be conducted firsl. The former will affect
the rate
heat losses from the reaction, and the latter the rate of heat release. These are two competing
mechanisms that determine the characteri stics of the smolder reaction .

or

111.1 .2 Transition Processes in Smoldering
This is a vc ry interesti ng task of the research program because transition processes such as ignition,
flaming and extinction are issues of great imponance in the fire safety field. These processes arc also
interesting as a fundamental combustion problem , and very little information is currently available on
them.
The experiments will concentrate initially in the determination of the condi tions leading to smolder initiation (o r ignition), and to naming. Smolder ignition is very sensitive to porous fuel type, rate of heat addition, geometry of the expe rim ent and igniter, and temperature, among others, and there is a need to
characterize the process . There is also a need to come up witll a protocol for the ignition of the foam that
is reliable so that an automat ized ign iti on system can be designed for its use in the space experi ments.
Concerning the transaion 10 flaming. tile parametric study currently being conducted will be continued to
determine the conditions leading to trans iti on to naming. As the program progresses drop tower and parabolic fligh t teSL'i will be planned to st ud y these process under microgravity conditions. Since the characteristic time or the transition process is sma ll (particularly !laming) it is expected that the ground base
microgravilY ex.periments will give uscJ"ul infollnalion.
Concurrent with the above experimen ts. the analyses already developed of forced flow opposed and forward smo ldering will be extended to include linite rate kinetics. The objective is to predict those conditions were extinction of the reaction was observed experimentally. The modeling
the transition to
!laming both in one-dimensional and smoldering in an interface will also be continued.

or

111.2 Space Experiments
This task will consist primaril y in the imeraction with the ASA LeRC engineers in the design and construction of the space based experimental apparatus. Also the data from the USML-l smolder experiments will be analyzed and compared wilh the ground data. The resulL') will be used to finalize the design
of the large scale space experiments

255

0 2 0 .- - - - - - - - - -________i " i
020 I r - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - " " ' ---,
_n~
.uoary

,

(--.1_,

+-0.00
• 0 lO
-- 0 48
-0- I 70
2 .110

~

• 015

"

E

....

6
§!

0.10

I

,

:l---:--~-1 -~- i - - -'

i-_

"

"

~.. -. - - .
/
-- ..... - •
..

O . OO'L--L--~~~-L

o

'CHIl1ON

I'
t

"
-

-

.

20M: ;
• _ - - . : - ~Wl.CJCIIID
• ~.......c:unt_ W1.OCftn
• _ _ _ _ - - ~'4IO..OCJTIn
• ~ _ _ - Dnt_Wl.DCIlO
• ........,-...-.. - wn'" LDCIMS
..,....,., -.....c a.nM1ft LOCf'H5

0.075

•
•

~ __
l . - - > " - - Dnt_ \lIOO'IMS
- unt_1DOOtWS

~O.~

'! ____

/

'".A
" .

0.05

} /

0100

f

I~ ..-

,

2.

?I

•

"

0.02'

~

__L_~_ _~~~~_ _L_~_ _~~~_L~
5U
100
150

__

.,·i.L J. ..
•

M
:

..

..

I'

.L.I'''''' ·•

.

•

0.000
0 .00 \

1JI5' AHC( 11IOII1CN1TlOH ("'"' I
DIS 1-=t I'1IOIoIIC1t1Tnf (rnm

t :

1~ "ti
I .

o. 0.}4
O O~

• •

1.00
1 .00

0 .75

O.!IO
(X/lf)
(X/lI)

2. Correlalion
lIow
Fig. 2. Correlati on of the opposed Ilow smolder data in terms of
velocity
lhe theoreticall y calculaled nondimensional smolder velocily .
the theoretically calcul aled

Fig. I. Variation of the downward smolder velocity along lhe
the
foam sample for several opposed air Ilow rales.
now rates.

N
tv

VI
V1

0\
0"-

21

...................J

,.""'"

'"

500 I

400

SCU-C8X '"L2~~
SCIII-C8X ~~~

~ lOG
~300

~~
~
u

~

U

400
4DO

~

lai200
W 200
a::

t:J
:J

1
i

£
....
...

'"

D0..

200

':l,rL.· ~
0

!>OO
500

1000

I!>OO
1500
lim~ (.~c
1im~ (.ec

2000

2!>OO
2500

lOOO
3000

..

100

~

· ~·;r-II~I.

lDO

0

ISO
'!Ie)

a
~

lOG
JOO

--

--

. ..

... leO
w

•

.'

·.
·.

·.

!Ie)
SO

~l.
.~lil

. ,.•
•
a

•

•

0
ID
10

J~
J500

15

'0-

il

11_
tI_

a_
20_

zo

nME, MINUTES
l1 .. E, ..INUTES

)

Fig. 3. Foam tcmreraturc histories ill Ilatural cOllvectioll , down Fig.
temperature
in natural collvecliofl
ward smolder fmlll ex.pcriments conducled ill a KC-13S aircral'l
wanl
e)(pcrimcnts conllucted in K('- 11S aircrafl
(acceleratiollievcl is indicated for rcferclln')'
n:lcrclIl'l'l.
(acccleratlOfl level indicaled

Fig. 4. 1'empcrature histories al severa l locations of the foam
Fig.
Tempcralure hislorics
several loca tiolls
the roam
cxpcrimcni conduClcd
tile lISML-1
sample from cxpcrimelll colldut:!ed in Ille llSML-1 of the Space
Shullk Colulllhia.
Shull Ie Cohllllllia.

-

---

-

---~

------

FLAME SPREAD ACROSS LIQUID POOLS

•

Howard Ross (NASA Lewis Research Center), Fletcher Miller (NASA Lewis/Case Western Reserve Unviersity),
David Schiller (University of California at Irvine), and William A. Sirignano (University of California at Irvine)

For flame spread over liquid fuel pools, the existing literature [1-9] suggests three gravitational influences:
(a) liquid phase buoyant convection, delaying ignition and assisting flame spread; (b) hydrostatic pressure
variation, due to variation in the liquid pool height caused by thermocapillary-induced convection; and (c)
gas-phase buoyant convection in the opposite direction to the liquid phase motion. No current model
accounts for all three influences. In fact, prior to this work, there was no ability to determine whether
ignition delay times and flame spread rates would be greater or lesser in low gravity.
Flame spread over liquid fuel pools is most commonly characterized by the relationship of the initial pool
temperature to the fuel's idealized flash point temperature, with four or five separate characteristic regimes
having been identified [2]. In the uniform spread regime, control has been attributed to: (a) gas-phase
conduction and radiation [2]; (b) gas-phase conduction only [10]; (c) gas-phase convection and liquid
conduction [11], and most recently (d) liquid convection ahead of the flame [3]. Suggestions were made
that the liquid convection was owed to both buoyancy and thermocapillarity. In the pulsating regime,
complicated flow structures have been observed in both the gas and liquid phases with circulation around
several centers; these flows, were attributed to combined thermocapillary and buoyant effects [1].
Of special interest to this work is the determination of whether, and under what conditions, pulsating spread
can and will occur in microgravity in the absence of buoyant flows in both phases. One possible
mechanism for pulsating spread in microgravity is if the "premixed gas - diffusive burning" pulsations are
due to periodicity between gas-phase conductive and liquid-phase convective control, as suggested in [7].
A second possibility, which will be determined by these investigations, is whelher pulsations may be
induced in low gravity by the presence of slow, forced, gas-phase, flow.
The approach we have taken to resolving the importance of buoyancy for these flames is: (a) normal
gravity experiments with advanced diagnostics; (b) microgravity experiments; and (c) numerical modelling
at arbitrary gravitational level.
NORMAL GRAVITY EXPERIMENTS [12}: Most normal gravity flame spread tests were conducted inside
a large metal glove box, 1.2 m long x 0.8 m wide x 0.65 m high which served to eliminate drafts from the
room. The fuel tray, which was 300 mm long and 20 mm wide, was placed lengthwise in the center of the
box and leveled on a platform. By placing aluminum inserts in the tray to raise its bottom, the depth of the
tray could be varied from 12.5 mm to 2 mm. The inside walls of the tray were lined with 3 mm thick glass
over the entire depth and length to reduce heat losses to the walls (the tray was 20 mm wide with the glass
in place). The outer aluminum walls of the tray, as well as the bottom, were hollow, allowing a glycol-water
solution to flow between them as a means of heating or cooling the tray. A standard CCD video camera
recorded the flame, and the image was later digitized to allow mapping of the flame position vs . time. This
semi-automated data conversion technique allowed detailed graphs of flame position vs. time for dozens
of runs to be made with relative ease.

Experiments on pool depth effects (where buoyancy might be expected to be important) were carried out
between temperatures of 13°C and 21 °C, at approximately 1 °C intervals. For pools of 1-propanol at Tliq
= 17.3 °0, the 10 mm pool shows a slightly higher flame speed than the 5 mm pool (borne out in several
runs). and both are well above that shown by the 2 mm deep tray. Furthermore, at this temperature, which
is approximately the transition temperature from uniform to pulsating spread, the shallow pool clearly shows
regular pulsations, while the others show only small amplitude irregular variations in spread rate. In fact,

Portions of this paper are reprinted from references 5, 12, and 15.

257

we found definite, cyclic pulsations at temperatures as high as 18.4 °e for the 2 mm pools, which was
thought to be above the transition temperature, but very uniform spread for the deeper pools. This
difference in flame spread character with depth provides indirect evidence that there may be a weak liquid
phase flow at these conditions that produces pulsations in a shallow fuel layer but yields uniform spread
in deeper pools .
Well into the pulsating region , at TLiq = 14.1 °e, all three depths showed regular pulsations , and it is quite
clear that the spread rate is dependent on pool depth. Again, the deeper pool shows a higher flame
propagation rate, with the difference between 5 mm and 10 mm now somewhat enlarged compared to the
17.3 °e pool. Furthermore , it is clear that the pulsation wavelength is also strongly dependent on pool
depth. Deeper pools exhibit much longer wavelength pulsations, in this case 4 pulsations over the 25 cm
distance presented for the 10 cm deep pool , compared to 13 for the 2 mm deep pool.
The flame velocity in the "jump" portion of the cycle appears to be constant at about 12.5 crn/sec and
therefore not to be a function of the pool depth, while the crawl velocity increased from 1 crn/sec at 2 mm
de ep to 3 crn/sec for fuel layers 10 mm deep. This indicates that the conditions in the gas phase are
similar and controll ing during a jump. Between jumps, the fl ame propagation is severely retarded for the
shallowest pools, and the flame remains nearly stationary at tim es. This is most likely due to a hi ndered
development of the subsurface eddy which preheats the liquid enough for the flame to spread further.
As shown by Williams [13]. the velocity in the liquid phase, which is of the same order as the flame spread
velocity, can be thought of as receiving contributions from both buoyancy and surface tension effects. His
scale analysis shows that for shallow pools the dependence of the average flame spread rate should range
from between h to h3 , depending on whether the dominant driving mechanism is surface tension or
buoyancy, respectively (here, h is the boundary layer depth = pool depth for shallow pools). Experiments
in which depth effects were reported only showed dependence from h 1/3 [9] to at most h [14]. While
conceding that more than three depths should be studied to reliably establish a trend, the three depths we
used indicate a linear dependence of average flame velocity on depth in the pulsating regime, and a less
than linear dependence in the uniform regime. As noted above, there is no depth dependence on the jump
velocity; the linearity arises from the increase in crawl velocity with depth. From this it seems that surface
tension is the primary driving mechanism in the flow, with liquid-phase buoyancy of lesser importance than
is attributed to it in Ref. 3. Further support for this conclusion is that, for shallow or deep pools, no one
has witnessed any1hing approaching a cubic dependency, or even a higher than first-order dependency,
on depth.
The pool depth has a strong effect on the pulsation wavelength, but there is no easily discernable
temperature dependence. The depth effect may be due to a limitation imposed by the bottom on the size
of the liquid circulation zone that slightly precedes the flame leading edge. This zone cannot fully develop
in the shallow pools, and the flame catches up more rapidly. Drag on the bottom may also slow down this
flow during each cycle, leading to more frequent pulsations but a lower overall velocity. This explanation
is consistent with numerical predictions of more frequent pulsations for increasing values of liquid viscosity
anci/or decreasing surface-tension coefficient [6]. For the 2 mm deep pool, surface deformation may also
be significant [8] and lead to the formation of roll cells; these cells could be the cause of the depth effect
on pulsation. Future work is needed to resolve the subsurface flow in shallow fuel pools and to confirm
this hypothesis.
Recently [15] we examined the temperature field using rainbow schlieren deflectometry (RSO) and the
velocity field using particle image velocimetry (PIV) for uniform and pulsating flame spread using propanol
and butanol as fuels. The RSO and PIV were recorded with standard eco video cameras and S-VHS
video recorders. The particle tracks, obtained using an 840 nm laser diode light sheet and 12 micron
plio lite particles, on the video record were digitized, color coded, and time-averaged to assist analysis.
Figure 1 is a 35 mm still photograph, taken off the video records, of the RSO visualization of the refractive
index gradients observed ahead of a left-to-right spreading flame in the pulsating regime. Figure 2 shows

258

L

-

-

-

a 35 mm still photograph superposing 10 consecutive frames to reveal a 0.33 sec time-lapse picture of the
flow field for the same conditions; in this case the flame moves from right-to-Ieft. In order to determine the
direction of the particle movement. the first frame was color coded red and the last frame was color coded
blue; a gradual transition between the two was then performed on intermediate frames. The initial initial
frame corresponds to when the flame was just visible on the right side of the photograph. Figure 2
suggests that the flow ahead of the flame has multiple, counter-clockwise rotating, centers.
In comparing figs. 1 and 2, notice that the flow penetrates to the full depth of the pool, unlike the
temperature field. Thus, as might be expected, the use of methods responding to thermal variations, such
as RSD or interferometry, to infer the flow patterns, can be misleading. From the video records, the flame
position never surpassed a surface location of elevated temperature indicated by the color change along
the surface. These results are consistent with the findings of Ito et al [3J who used holographic
interferometry to determine the temperature field. The distance at which surface flow is seen ahead of the
flame exceeded that of the temperature field. The set of measurements implies that the flame advances
only to that position where the surface temperature rises to the flash point; however, the flow head clearly
surpasses this location and the flame's leading edge throughout the pulsating spread cycle, consistent with
the conclusions of refs. 6-7.
Similar measurements were made in the uniform spread regime . The RSD indicates elevated liquid
temperatures penetrate less distance both into the pool depth and ahead of the flame. The PIV also shows
liquid-phase convection does indeed exist a short distance ahead of the flame. Most likely then convection
is the dominant heat transfer mechanism all the way to the flash point even in the uniform spread regime,
a conclusion which is consistent with ref. 3.
MICROGRAVITY EXPERIMENTS [5.12]: We performed a series of normal and microgravity ().J.g)
experiments in the NASA Lewis 5.18 second Zero Gravity Facility. A 15 cm diameter, 1 mm deep tray was
mounted inside a 113 liter pressure vessel for both safety purposes and to permit the oxygen concentration
to be varied. The base of the tray was machined from ceramic material to minimize heat losses and ease
ignition from a small nichrome, electrically-heated wire (250 ).J.m diameter) cantilevered over the tray. To
provide a reproducible fill level, and to minimize pre-drop evaporation, the pool was filled by gravity just
before the drop. Multiple safety systems were employed as described below. The sole instrumentation
was top and side view cameras, operating at 24 fls and 50 fls, respectively, and a thermocouple to
determine the initial system temperature . The slow speed of the cameras was required due to the low
luminosity and thinness of the flame. Following the test, the flame spread rate was determined from the
visible flame diameter as a function of time through the use of a digitized motion analyzer.
A major problem with Ilg, fluid experiments is the control of the liquid surface, whose shape is determined
by a balance of gravitational and surface tension forces, i.e. the static Bond number, Bo=p*g*1 2/cr, where
p is the liquid density, g is the gravitational acceleration, I is the characteristic vessel dimension, and cr is
the surface tension. For propanol, Bo, based on a 7.5 cm radius, is about 1800 in normal gravity and
0.0018 in microgravity. As such, the liquid surface transitions from a ''flat'' configuration in normal gravity
to one of constant curvature, related to its contact angle. Scale analysis and drop tower experiments in
both the 2.2 sec and 5 sec facilities were performed in partially and completely filled cylinders to estimate
the transition and settling time. For simple comparison to normal gravity results and due to the limited ).J.g
time, the surface curvature and transition time needed to be minimized. The use of very shallow (1 .6 mm)
pools in completely full trays provided such minimization; also the contribution to spread of gas-phase
buoyancy was isolated by a comparison of normal and microgravity flame spread characteristics.
Although the leading edges were virtually identical in appearance, the trailing shape of the microgravity
flame was nearly parallel to the pool surface, indicating the suppression of buoyancy. For conditions where
the corresponding normal-gravity flame spread was uniform, the microgravity spread was also uniform, at
rates comparable to the normal gravity flames. The similarity of normal and microgravity spread in the
uniform regime indicates that (a) buoyancy-driven motion in either phase had no influence on uniform flame

259

..

-

-

spread , (b) radiation effects on spread were probably small for this scale experiment (the large change in
flame height made no difference) , and therefore (c) liquid conduction, gas conduction or thermocapillaryinduced liquid motion were the controlling parameters . Normal gravity results described above suggest the
latter is the controlling parameter.
In contrast, pulsating flame behavior in microgravity, where buoyant flows in both the liquid and gas phases
are negligible, was never observed. Instead, independent of 02 concentration , fuel or diluent type , the
initial conditions which gave rise to pulsati ng flame spread in normal gravity co incided with those causing
extinguishment in a quiescent, microgravity environment. In those cases where the flame did spread to
the edge of the tray, the microgravity flame subsequently collapsed "bottom-up,' i.e. toward the luminou s
region farth est from the pool, until the remaining flame was very thin and blue at a distance of 10-1 5 mm
from the pool surface. After this collapse, the flame lifted very slightly away from the pool, and its
luminosity steadily diminished, disappearing at low 0 2 concentrations befo re the end of the test.
In a second series of microgravity tests, the fuel tray was changed fro m being circul ar to a trough with
dimensions 15 cm x 2 cm x 1 cm deep. In this case 1-butanol in air and 1-propanol in 17% 0 2 were used
as the fuels, since they produce pulsating flames at room temperature. To test whether the extinction
condition can be changed and whether pulsating spread can occur in the presence of a forced air flow in
microgravity, a series of tests was conducted with a fan providing a slow, opposed flow of 10-25 crn/sec ,
as measured with a TSI hot wire anemometer. This flow regime is inaccessible in normal-gravity flame
spread due to the induced buoyant flows. Initial experiments confirmed that the change of tray geometry
from a shallow, axisymmetric pool to a deep, linear pool did not affect the previous conclusions regarding
microgravity flame spread behavior under quiescent conditions : the aforementioned pulsating/extinction and
uniform/uniform correspondence was maintained in the new pool when comparing normaVmicrogravity
behavior. However, with the opposed air flow the flame was sustained in microgravity where under
quiescent conditions it had extinguished. This agrees with studies of microgravity flame spread over solids,
in which slow, opposed flow lowers the limiting oxygen index [16]. Unlike solids though, the flame stand-off
distance remained immeasurably close to the pool surface until extinction. For solids, surface re-radiation
has been cited as contributing principally to the extinction [17] , but the low surface temperature of the pool
makes this an unlikely mechanism. These differences suggest that other factors, perhaps gas-phase
radiative losses [16], conductive losses to the environment or the pool [6]. and/or low oxygen transport rates
[18]. are contributing to flame extinction of liquid pools in microgravity.
The character of the flame spread with opposed flow was unsteady, and to some extent pulsating, with the
frequency of the pulsations comparable to those observed in normal gravity. It was determined that the
fan swirl was also approximately of this frequency (no flow straightener was used), so a definite statement
that classical pulsating spread was observed is not yet justifiable. The flames appeared very responsive
to the air flow; when the air flow weakened, so did the flame, to the point that it nearly extinguished.
Therefore, the tests showed conclusively that the flame spread behavior was tied to the air flow, furthering
proof that subflash microgravity flame spread is not controlled entirely by liquid convection.

NUMERICAL MODELLING: Our recent computational studies have addressed unsteady, axisymmetric
and planar open pool configurations. The transient numerical model uses the SIMPLE algorithm [19] with
the SIMPLEC modification [20]. This method uses primitive variables (u, v, p, h), a staggered mesh, and
the hybrid-differencing scheme. The continuity equation is satisfied by solving the pressure-correction
equation in the SIMPLE algorithm. A "phase-split" solution technique is used in that the gas and liquid
phases are solved separately. At the gas/liquid interface, Dirichlet-type boundary conditions from the
solution of the liquid phase are used for the solution of the gas phase, while Neumann conditions from the
gas phase are used for the upper boundary of the liquid phase. Accurate modelling of the reaction zone
requires a fine numerical mesh not only in the reaction zone itself, but also in the region between the
reaction zone and the liquid surface (to predict accurately the liquid surface heating ahead of the flame) .
In order to save computer time, a partially-adaptive grid scheme is used to move the fine mesh region
along with the spreading flame in the radial direction. Convergence of the governing equations is optimized

260

_ _J

L

by underrelaxation and extra nerations of the pressure-correction equation.
The effects of blackbody radiation, surface tension, gravny level, variable density and thermophysical
properties, vaporization, and finite-rate chemical kinetics are included in the computational model.
Infinitely-fast chemical kinetics (i.e., the flame sheet approximation) cannot be assumed because the flame
leading edge is premixed. The model assumes that the liquid surface remains flat and horizontal at all
gravity levels. Solutocapillary forces and recession of the liquid surface due to vaporization are neglected.
It is predicted that at normal gravity, the temperatures in the reaction zone are generally higher and the
reaction zone thinner than at microgravny. The flame standoff distance is slightly smaller at normal gravity
than at microgravity, but the reason for this is not as clear as with flame spread over solids. Without the
effects of surface tension, flame spread rates decrease with increasing gravity level. When surface tension
is included, flame propagation is either uniform or pu lsating depending on the gravity level and initial pool
temperature.
Pulsating spread of the precursor flame in front of the main body of the diffusion flame is caused by the
formation of a recirculation cell in the gas phase in front of the flame leading edge (see Figure 3) . This
recirculation cell is formed by a combination of opposed flow in the gas phase due to buoyancy and
concurrent flow in the liquid phase due to thermocapillary forces. At microgravity, a recirculation cell may
still form in front of the flame leading edge solely due to the surface-tension-driven shear flow. However,
the strength of this recirculation cell is relatively weak compared to that at normal gravity. Therefore,
periodic flame pulsations are not predicted at microgravity.
Hot gas expansion plays a significant role in the flame pulsation process by causing the periodiC destruction
of the gas-phase recirculation cell. Large hot gas expansion velocities oppose the flow of fresh oxygen to
the reaction zone. Both a lack of oxygen due to the hot gas expansion and quenching by the liquid surface
leads to the extinguishment of the precursor flame. When hot gas expansion is not included in the
simulations, small backward and forward pulsations of the precursor flame still occur at normal gravity due
to the presence of the recirculation cell in front of the flame leading edge. However, the recirculation cell
structure remains intact throughout the pulsation cycle, and the precursor flame is extinguished due to
quenching by the liquid surface.
The presence of both opposed flow (e.g., due to buoyancy) and concurrent flow (due to thermocapillarity)
in front of the flame is required for periodic flame pulsations to occur. Since the flame spread rate
increases with initial pool temperature (due to a larger concentration of fuel vapor in the gas phase), the
region of liquid surface heating ahead of the flame decreases. Without appreciable liquid surface flow
ahead of the flame , a recirculation cell does not form in front of the flame leading edge ; therefore, flame
pulsations do not occur for initial temperatures near the flash point.
FUTURE WORK: Numerical simulations to date have used fuel properties of n-decane. In the future,
alcohols such as methanol will be Simulated to help explain the fundamental differences in flame spread
characteristics between hydrocarbon and alcohol fuels. The effects of gas-phase radiation and diluent type
will also be investigated.
In normal gravny experiments, we will continue to perform flow and temperature field visualization studies
for several pool sizes over a range of temperatures. In addition we plan to do rocket-based microgravity
experiments. The three principal areas will be : a. The effects of deeper and longer pools ; b. the effects
of small levels of forced gas-phase flow, both opposed and concurrent, in both the uniform and pulsating
spread regime; and c. the effect of fuel type on flame spread .
REFERENCES
1.
Glassman, f. and Dryer, F.: Fire Safety Journal 3, 123 (1980/81).
2.
Akita, K.: Fourteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, p. 1075, The Combustion

261

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20 .

Institute, 1973.
Ito, A., Masuda, D., and Saito, K.: Comb. Flame 83,375 (1991).
Matsumoto, Y. and Saito , T.: Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers 46(B),
998 (1980) (in Japanese).
Ross, H. and Sotos, R.: Twenty-Third Symposium (International) on Combustion, p. 1649, The
Combustion Institute, 1990.
Schiller, D., and Sirignano, W.: "Ignition and Flame Spread Above Liquid Fuel Pools," Fall
Meeting of the Western States Section of The Combustion Institute, Paper No. WSCI 91-96
(1991 ).
Di Blasi, C.: Twenty-Third Symposium (International) on Combustion, p. 1669, The Combustion
Institute, 1990.
Torrance, K., and Mahajan, R.: Comb. Sci. Tech. 10, 125, (1975).
Mackinven, R., Hansel, J., and Glassman, I. : Comb. Sci. Tech . 1,293 (1970) .
Glassman, I., comments in Akita, K. , in Fourteenth Symposium (Int'I) on Combustion, Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, pp. 1075-1083, (1973).
Hirano, T., Suzuki , T., Combust. Sci. Technol., 23: 215-224 (1980) .
Miller, F. and Ross, H.: Twenty-Fourth International Symposium on Combustion, p. TBD, The
Combustion Institute, 1992.
Williams, F. : Combustion Theory, 2nd ed., p. 515, Benjamin/Cummings, 1985.
Burgoyne, J. and Roberts, A.: Proc. Roy. Soc. A 308,55 (1968).
Miller, F. and Ross, H.: "Liquid-Phase Flow and Temperature Field Measurements of rlame
Spread over Laboratory-Scale Alcohol Pools" submitted to the Western States Section Fall, 1992
Meeting of The Combustion Institute.
Olson, S., Ferkul P., and T'ien, J.: Twenty-Second Symposium (International) on Combustion, p.
1213, The Combustion Institute, 1988.
Altenkirch, R. and Bhattacha~ee , S.: AIM Prog. Astro . Aero . Sci. 130 (1990).
Olson, S.: Comb. Sci. Tech. 76, 233 (1991) .
Patankar, S. V. , Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow, McGraw-Hili, New York, 1980.
Van Doormaal, J. P. and Raithby, G. D., "Enhancements of the SIMPLE Method for Predicting
Incompressible Fluid Flows, "Numerical Heat Transfer, Vol. 7, pp. 147--163, 1984.

262

FIGURE I: RSD Visualization of a butanol-air flame at 23 C. Flame spreads from left to right. The pool depth is I cm.

FIGURE 2: PIV of a butanol-air flame at 23 C. Flame spread is from right to left. Time lapse
..he field of view of this picture is different than that of Figure 1.

IS

0.33 sec. Pool depth is 1 em: note th:!l

"",:-;r.r;m:=:-mlTITTTiTIlTIiTrilTImTTTiTIl y

lIillI~g

r

=0

y

=0

r = 20 mm

= 4 mm

y=O
r =0

r= 20 mm

,

Figure 3.-Flow pattern and flame struc)ure for one flame pulsation at normal gravity. In
(d)-(f), the recirculation cell structure In front 01 the flame leading edge is destroyed during
the premixed burning portion of the flame . Hot gas expansion opposes the flow of fresh
oxygen to the reaction zone , and the flame moves backwards (as if it were being extinguished). The gas expansion rate decreases alter the flame propagates through the premixed region, and, subsequently, the ~UJlYant forces recover to provide fresh oxygen to
the reaction zone.

263

See Golor Plate F-5

COMMENTS
Question (Sandra Ol son, NASA Lewis R esearch Center): You cU IllJ11entcd th at th ere is fl O CO fl ~,' fl S U S as to
the e ffect of pool depth on s pread rate. Yo ur data, fo r pools 2-J!l 111111 deep, ag rees q ualitatively I\'ith
lit e rature data fo r 1-7 mm deep pools (i.e. , linear relation). Th e o th c r two re fere nces cit ed; 2-4 111111 a nd 225 mm (I think) show no e ffect or a 1/ 3-depe nden ee re lati o n, re. pecti vcly. Cou ld you co mm c nt furth e r o n
the trend with depth , speci fically if it is possible that for the r a n ~cs s tudi es each ma y be v;liid , \\'hie h may
he lp inte rpret controlling mecha nisms of nam e spread?

Jv!'-+
!> IN.'+

-::0

5 "~S.!>/

;( -"OI.J

v('.f~ .

f oS5

1

b I~

F<t:tr , ~~~

?

7

7
.

Answe r: The qu esti o n o f how n ame sprea d velocity varies with p,)o l de pth has bee n st udied by ~l I'e ra l
researchers with mixed results. W e believe th at th e work with "ery sha ll ow poo ls mi ssed it depth dependence
by co ll ecting too few data points, a nd th e n plotting the m o n a log sca le. The lin ea r relation wt' described
was based o n 3 data points; we readily co nceded in o ur pape r th ;ll was ins uffi cien t to draw firm ('( )I1cJu sio ns.
Eventually one ex pects the /lame spread rate to become indepe nd e nt o f pool depth , a t least in I II Irmal g ravity
(i. e ., the pool cou ld be co nsidered "deep") . Previo us work sugges ted that a pool depth of 1 em II I) uld meet
this criterion. It is met based o n therm a l penetrati o n depth , but not mom e ntum con ide ratiull s: ,' ur PlY
showe d the vortex reaches th e poo l bOllom.
Q uestion (S. R aghu, SUNY at Stony Brook): In the /low pallern in th e liquid resem bles th at
wave propagation have any studi es bee n do ne fr o m th is pe rs peel ive?

tilll

ing surface

A nswer: No one has yet measured quantitatively th e exte nt o f surfa ce deforma ti o ll s o r waves dU ll ng fl a me
spread. At th e same tim e, we know th ey exi l. Es tim ates suggest de fo rm ati o n is o n th e o rd er (li' ] mm ,
therefore deformation may be quite sig nifica nt for sha ll ow pools. Our PIV resu lt s s uggest th at ~" l11 e form o f
surface wave exists a nd affects the !l ow pattern in 2 mm deep ponls, but not in 10 mm deep po(ll ".

264

I

J

-

-

-

-

-

'-

'-~ '--'-- '---

A STUDY OF IGNITION PHENOMENA OF BULK METALS BY
RADIANT HEATING
Melvin C. Branch, A. Abbud-Madrid, T.J. Feiereisen, and J.W. Daily
Mechanical Engineering Department
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0427

Introduction
Early research work on combustion of metals was motivated by the knowledge of the large heat release
and corresponding high temperatures associated with metal-oxygen reactions. The advent of space flight
brought about an increased interest in the ignition and combustion of metallic particles as additives in solid
rocket propellants (Refs. 1 and 2). More recently, attention bas been given to the flammability properties
of bulk, structural metals due to the number of accidental explosions of metal components in high-pressure
oxygen systems (Ref. 3).
The following work represents a preliminary study that is part of a broader research effort aimed at
providing further insight into the phenomena of bulk metal combustion by looking at the effects of gravity
on the ignition hehavior of metals. The scope of this preliminary experimental study includes the use of
a non-coherent, continuous radiation ignition source, the measurement of tem perature profiles of a variety
of metals and a qualitative observation of the ignition phenomena at normal gravity.
The specific objectives of this investigation include: a) a feasibility study of the use of a continuous
radiation source for metal ignition, b) testing and characterization of the ignition behavior of a variety of
metals and c) building a preliminary experimental database on ignition of metals under normal gravity
conditions.
The advantage of using a continuous radiation light source lies primarily on its non-intrusive character and
on the nature of its spectral distribution. A short-arc lamp provides broadband radiation in the ultraviolet,
visible and near-infrared regions (in the 200-1200 nm range); since the absorptivity of metals increases
significantly with decreasing wavelength within this region, this feature will in tum result in a decreased
input power requirement. The flexibility, ruggedness and low-weight properties of these lamps make them
also very attractive for future experiments on high-speed centrifuges (for elevated gravity environments)
and zero-gravity simulators (for reduced gravity experiments).
The metals tested in this investigation, iron (Fe), 1018 carbon steel, titanium (Ti), deoxidized copper (01)
and aluminum (AI) were selected because of their importance as elements of structural metals and their
simple chemical composition (pure metals instead of multi-component alloys to avoid complication in
future morphology studies). These samples were also chosen to exemplify the two different combustion
modes experienced by metals: heterogeneous, surface oxidation (Fe, 1018 carbon steel, Ti and 01) and

265

homogeneous, gas phase reaction (Al). In addition, these specimens exhibi t a wide variety of melting
temperatures, heats of comb ustion, oxide fo rmation processes and adiabatic flame temperatures. Copper
was selected since no reported cases of copper rod burn ing were fo und in the literature. 1018 carbon steel
was chosen for comparison purposes since it has an almost identical composition as iron except for a
0.18% carbon content difference (an d less than 1% of other elements). The experimental approach
consisted in providing temperature profiles, ignition temperature values and a visual record of the heating,
ignition and combustion stages of the metal specimen.

Ex perimenta l A pparatus and Procedures
The experimental system is shown in Figure 1. The radiation source consisted of a 1000 W xenon
short-arc lamp with 250 W of broadband output radiation power (with approximately 42% of output power
between 800-1200 nm and the rest between 200-800 nm).
The high-intensity, non-coherent light comes out of the lamp in a collimated beam (4° balf-angle) and is
then intercepted by an aspheric lens (8 cm diam. , 6 em f.l.) which provides the maximum light collection
efficiency for a given focal length under these conditions. The beam is tben focused down to a 5 mm spot
on th e top surface of a metal sample providing approximately a 1 MW/m 2 power density (corrected for
transmitting medium absorption). The cylindrical metal specimen is 5 mm in diameter and 5 mm high
and rests on top of a circular refractory brick base which isolates the sample from heat conduction to its
pedestal. These components are located inside a 4.5 liter stainless steel cylindrical chamber which permits
input radiation and visual access through a 10 em diam., 2 cm thick quartz w indow. An oxygen
environment (99.5 % pure 0 2) was used in all cases at absolute pressures between 0.4 and 4.0 atm. The
chamber pressure was monitored by a solid-state piezoresistive pressure transducer (0-20 atm range). The
s pecimen surface temperature was measured by a Pt-Pt 10% Rh (0.1 mm diam.) thermocouple located at
approximately 0.3 mm below the surface. Visual observations were recorded with a black and white
Panasonic camera with a #5-density aluminized mylar filter.
Prior to the experimental run , the metal sample was thoroughly cleaned with acetone and placed on top
of th e refractory firebrick. Care was taken to assure that the thermocouple made good contact with th e
metal. After closing th e combustion chamber, three evacuation and filling cycles were executed to assure
a pure oxygen atmosphere inside. The lamp was turned on to full power and the beam was focused on
top of th e metal specimen. The ex periment was monitored throughout by temperature and pressure
displays and the video camera. After complete combustion, the sample was allowed to cool down and
the final pressure was recorded to quantify oxygen consumption. The chamber was opened and th e solid
comb ustion products were stored for future analysis. A minimum of 5 samples of each metal were tested
to ensure consistency and experimental repeatability.

Results and Discussion
Initial testing of th e short-arc lamp was performed with simple heating and meltin g experiments with the
different metals in air at atmospheric conditions. Melting was successfully ach ieved in all cases in time
periods ranging from 15 to 25 seconds. The lamp was then tested for radia nt ignition of metal samples
in a pure oxygen atmosphere. All metals except for aluminum exhibited ignition and combustion within
the same time period as with the melting tests. The results obtained are summarized in the next three
sections.

266

- - - - - -- - -

I) Qualitative observations
A visual record of all successful experimental runs revealed the existence of three important and distinctive
phases:
a) The heating period included an initial sudden thermal expansion of the top surface of the
specimen after radiation was applied_ Surface structure changes were also detected by the variation of the
radiation characteristics of the sample. These surface changes are related to the allotropic nature of metals
in the solid phase, the oxide layer formation and the solid-liquid phase transition.
b) The ignition phase was characterized by the formation of a liquid metal pool on the top surface
of the sample, followed by rapid oxidation and a noticeable increase in energy release evidenced by the
intense radiation emitted from the reaction zone.
c) The combustion event, i.e., the self-sustained propagation of the reaction zone was
accompanied (in the case of iron, 1018 carbon steel and titanium) by a violent exothermic reaction
including outward expelling of small particles that collected in the walls and window of the chamber. The
detection of intense luminosity is due to the high temperature (3000-4000 K) obtained in the reaction zone.
A marked difference in reaction intensity was observed between the iron and the 1018 carbon steel
samples, where the latter exhibited a much higher flux of ejected hot particles probably due to its carbon
co ntent. The behavior of copper in the combustion phase had very different characteristIcs 3S explained
in the Special cases section.
II) Temperature profiles
Temperature records also revealed uniquely the existence of the heating, ignition and combustion stages.
Figure 2 shows the temperature histories of titanium, copper, iron and 1018 carbon steel.
All samples showed an increase in temperature with asymptotic approach to a steady-state value in the
first few seconds of radiative heating. In the preliminary melting experiments in air the steady-state
temperature value (not shown) was fixed by the melting point of the metal due to the constant-temperature
phase change. In contrast, a point of inflection was reached on the temperature vs. time plots
corresponding to ignition experiments in pure oxygen (see Figure 2). This transition pOint is identified
as the temperature at which th e heat generated by the metal oxidation first exceeds the heat lost through
conduction, convection and radiation. This temperature is defined in this investigation as the critical
ignition temperature of the metal sample_ Beyond this point, the metal specimen is driven into a thermal
runaway region as a consequence of the exponential dependence of the reaction rate on temperature. The
acceleration of the reaction rate ultimately reaches the catastrophic oxidation level which defines the
exothermic, self-propagating combustion zone. At this stage, the temperature drastically increases to the
vaporization temperature of the metal oxide (approx. 3000-4000 K depending on the metal type) where
it stays throughout the combustion phase. As shown in Figure 2, the thermocouples were unable to follow
the temperature increase in this last stage because their maximum operating temperature is around 2000K.
Table 1 shows the heat of combustion, melting temperature, ignition temperature, and adiabatic flame
temperature of the different metals tested_ In the case of iron, 1018 carbon steel, copper and titanium the
ignition temperature is always below or in the range of the melting temperature of the metal. This result
is typical of metals exhibiting heterogeneous reaction with non-protective oxide layers. In the case of iron
and 1018 carbon steel, the temperature profiles and ignition temperatures are very similar due to the
almost identical chemical composition. For the titanium run shown in Figure 2, the thermocouple broke
before the temperature curve reached the point of inflection corresponding to the critical value for ignition
(approx. 1720 K).

267

III) Special cases

The following cases represent two noteworthy examples of different behavior from the previously
mentioned results.
a) Aluminum. All ignition tests performed on aluminum were unsuccessful. This metal proved
to be impossible to ignite due to the formation of a thick, extremely resistant, insulating oxide layer that
prevented the molten metal inside to come into contact with the surrounding oxygen atmosphere. The
existence of this protective aluminum oxide layer has been confirmed by other studies (Refs. 4 and 5).
The ignition temperature of aluminum is much higher than the melting temperature of the metal and it
actually corresponds to the melting point of the metal oxide (AI203). Different techniques (including
forced mechanical stressing and prolonged radiation heating) were used to induce ignition in the metal
sample, but all proved unsuccessful.
b) Copper. A very interesting and unexpected result of this investigation was the ignition and
combustion of copper samples. Previous work (Ref. 6) has classified copper as a non-flammable metal
due to the sudden extinction of the rod after ignition on upward propagation studies. However, under our
experim ental configuration, clear evidence of ignition and subsequent indefinite downward propagation
of copper specimens was obtained at 0.84 atm. ill contrast with iron, 1018 carbon steel and titanium,
copper exhibited a smooth combustion phase characterized by a slow regression rate with a low-luminosity
reacti on zone. This behavior may be due to the low heat of comb ustion which retards the melting and
subsequent oxidation of the metal in the molten surface. This same argument may explain the difficulty
of burning copper in the upward propagation mode. Under this configuration, the detachment of the first
molten ball from the vertical rod removes the thermal mass that preheats the solid metal in front of it and
causes a rapid cooling of the reaction zone (where the low heat of reaction is unable to overcome heat
losses) with extinguishment following afterwards. Several tests with different specimen lengths (up to 30
mm) were made to provide unmistakable evidence of self-propagation and complete oxidation of the
sam ple. In addition, all tests showed a noticeable decrease in chamber pressure (2-5%) providing further
indication of complete metal ox idation.

Conclusions
This study has demonstrated th e effectiveness of using a non-coherent, continuous radiation source for
metal ignition. In addition, ignition and combustion tests were performed on different metal specimens,
including iron, 1018 carbon steel, titanium and copper. Qualitative observations and temp erature profiles
have revealed the existence of the heating, ignition and combustion stages. These zones are characterized
by well-defined surface structure changes, surface temperature behavior, luminosity and chemical activity.
Values of ignition temperatures (defined here as the critical point of inflection in the temperature vs. time
curve) were obtained and compared with results of previous investigations (Refs. 4,8,9). Good agreement
(+/- 10%) was found considering the differences on ignition temperature definition and experimental
technique used among the various studies.
The experimental work is being complemented by modeling studies which include the effects of
conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer in the solid specimen and the surrounding gas. The
computational model explores the effects of gravity (0.0 g to 10.0 g) and pressure (0.15 atm to 10 atm)
on the heating phase of the metal sample under non-oxidizing conditions. Preliminary results indicate that
for a constant input heat flux on the specimen, there is an increase in convection heat transfer that
asymptotically approaches a constant value both for increasing gravity and for increasing pressure. This
limit in convection heat transfer imposes a limit on the minimum steady state specimen temperature

268

obtained. The heat transfer studies are designed to help evaluate the energy balance on the specimen
during heating prior to ignition.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Lewis Research Center,
Grant NASA-NAG3-1257. The starting date for the research project was May 1, 1991.

References

1.

Markstein, G. H., "Combustion of Metals", AlAA Journal, 1, No.3, 1963, pp. 550-562.

2.

Friedman, R. and Macek, A., "Ignition and Combustion of Aluminum Particles in Hot Ambient
Gases", Combustion and Flame, 6, 1962, pp. 9-19.

3.

Stoltzfus, J. M., Homa, J . M., Williams, R. E ., and Benz, F. J., "ASTM Committee G-4 Metals
Flammability Test Program: Data and Discussion", Flammahilitv and Sensitivity of Materials in
Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres: Third Volume, ASTM STP 9R6, D.W. Schroll, Ed., American
Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 28-53.

4.

Nguyen, K., and Branch, M. e., "Ignition Temperature of Bulk 6061 Aluminum, 302 Stainless Steel
and 1018 Carbon Steel in Oxygen", Combustion Science and Technology, 53, 1987, pp. 277-288.

5.

Merzhanov, A G ., Grigorjev, M . and GaIchenko, Y. A, "Aluminum Ignition", Comhus ti on and
Flame, 29, 1977, pp. 1-14.

6.

Me Ilroy, K., Zawierucha , R., and Dmevich, R. F., "Promoted Ignition Behavior of Engineering
Alloys in High-Pressure Oxygen", Flammability and Sensitivity of Materi,lIs in Oxygen-Enriched
Atmospheres: Third Volume. ASTM STP 9R6, D.W. Schroll, Ed., American Society for Testing and
Materials, Philadelphia, PA. 1988, pp. 85-104.

7.

Brzustowski, T.A, and Glassman, I., "Vapor-Phase Diffusion Flames in the Combustion of
Magnesium and Aluminum: II. Experimental Observations in Oxygen Atmospheres", in
Heterogeneous Combustion. Wolfbard, H. G., Glassman, 1., and Green , L., Jr., (cds.), Academic
Press, New York, 1964, pp. 117-158.

8.

Grosse, AV., and Conway, J.B., "Combustion of Metals in Oxygen," Ind. Eng. Chern., 50, 1958, pp.
663-672.

9.

Reynolds, W.e., "Investigation of Ignition Temperatures of Solid Metals," NASA TN D-182, 1959.

269

Xenon short-ar c
lamp

A --~

1800

~
I
I

Q

I
I

1600

From
power supply

Q

·
.
. . . . . . . . T. . . . ·.. ·f............

1400

Titaniu m

<:i

.....

Aspheric
lens

B

1200

C".l

·

.

.
. . . T..............+ .............. ..
. .
i· ............· :..... ......·..r·. . ··_-

·c~·~;;

...........

. . . . . . . . r. . . . ·. T........ ... ...............
·

!

:

i Carbon i

r steeUl~T8)'

....·....·

.....

C)

E
C)

f-

Metal
specimen

Refractory
firebrick

r·
• • • •··• • •• • • • • • "TIr:~=

600

0-

800

.......... .. .. Y" ...............,..........................

400

Quartz
window

. ··· . · · . ·. .:.· · · ........· · ·;· ..........· · . :.·........·. . i........ .·. . .'1' ................

1000

+

T~=~~~le .... _..

200

o

Press. signal
to display

Temp. signal
to display

5

25

20

15

10

Time (sec)

Figure 2. Temper ature vs. time behavio r of iron,
1018 carbon steel, copper and titanium

Figure 1. Experim ental Appara tus

Adiaba tic Flame
Temp.

(K)

Ignitio n
Tempe rature
(K) a

7425

930

2300

3800

Titaniu m (Ti)

4710

1963

1720

3300

Iron (Fe)

1765

1812

1490

3000

Carbon Steel

1765

1812

1450

3000

585

1356

1060

1635

Metal
Specim en

Heat of
Combustion
(cal/g)

Meltin g
Tempe rature

Alumi num (AI)

(K)

(1018)
Coppe r (Cu)

et. aL [7]
a From this investi gation, except for alumin um from Brzust owski,
temper atures
Table 1. Heats of combu stion, melting , ignitio n and adiaba tic flame
specim ens used in this investi gation.
for the differe nt metal

270

30

COMMENTS
Question (John Moore, Colorado School of Mines): I noticed that you said you did not ignite the aluminum,
yet you quote an ignition temperature for aluminum of 2300 K - this is the approximate melting point of
aluminum - there must be some connection. Can you please comment?
Answer: In the present investigations of the ignition of metals by a continuous radiation source we were
unable to ignite the aluminum specimens. We feel that this is due to the limitation of the powcr of the
radiant ignition source used. In previous studies using a CO 2 laser for ignition (Refercnce 4 in the paper)
we were able to ignite specimens of AI 6061. In those studies the aluminum specimen formed a solid
aluminum coating on the surface with molten aluminum in the core of the specimen. The ignition occurred
when the oxide coating approached its melting temperature and weakened sufficiently to crack or otherwise
expose the molten aluminum to the oxygen. Therefore, there is a connection between the melting
temperature of aluminum and the ignition process in the aluminum specimens.

271

METALS COMBUSTION IN NORMAL GRAVITY AND MICROGRAVITY
Theodore A. Steinberg and D. Bruce Wilson
Lockheed-ESC
White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico
and
Frank J . Benz
NASA
White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico

Introduction a nd backgr ound
The study of the combu stion chara c teristics of metallic materials
has been an ongoing area of research at the NASA White Sands Test
Facility (WSTF) (ref . 1 and r e f. 2). This research has been in
support of both government and industrial operations and deals
not only with the combustion of specific metallic materials but
also with the relative flammabilities of these materials under
similar conditions. Since many of the metallic materials that
are characterized at WSTF for aerospace applications are to be
used in microgravity environments, it was apparent that the
testing of these materials needed to proceed in a microgravity
environment. It was believe~ that burning metallic materials in
a microgravity environment would allow the evaluation of the
validity of applying normal gravity combustion tests to
characterize metallic materials to be used in microgravity
environments.
It was also anticipated that microgravity testing
would provide insight into the general combustion process of
metallic materials.
The availability of the NASA Lewis Research
center's (LeRC) 2.2-second drop tower provided the necessary
facility to accomplish the microgravity portion of the testing
while the normal gravity testing was conducted at NASA WSTF. The
tests, both at LeRC and WSTF, were conducted in the same
instrumented system and utilized the standard metal flammability
test of upward propagation burning of cylindrical rod samples.
Until this study, microgravity combustion tests did not exist for
metals and alloys and there was uncertainty as to whether these
materials would support combustion in the absence of gravity.
However, nonmetals have been tested under microgravity
conditions. Generally it has been found that in microgravity,
nonmetals do not burn as well as similar experiments in normal
gravity. Normally, the reduction in combustion rate for
nonmetals in microgravity has been attributed to the vapor-phase
diffusion flame these materials exhibit.
To study the microgravity combustion of metallic materials, a

Preceding Page Blank
273

proposal was written and submitted to the director of Johnson
Space Center (JSC). The JSC director funded this work through
the JSC Director's Discretionary Fund in 1989 with a duration of
two years. With this funding, an experimental program with
appropriate instrumentation and facility usage commenced to study
the combustion of metallic materials in microgravity. Three
subsequent proposals were funded by the NASA WSTF Laboratories
Office Chief to continue this work and two proposals are
currently under consideration for funding.
The results of these
test programs and anticipated future work are summarized below.
The use of metallic particles as additives to rocket propellants
is normally thought of as the impetus for understanding the
combustion characteristics of metallic materials.
Since this
time, there have been several critical failures of metal
components in high-pressure oxygen systems.
For these reasons
NASA was prompted to initiate programs to better understand the
ignition, combustion, and flame spread of metallic materials as
well as programs to contrast the similarities and differences of
metallic materials combustion as a function of the gravity level.
Unlike nonmetallic materials which burn in a vapor-phase
reaction, metallic materials can exhibit a liquid or condensedphase combustion reaction (ref. 3). The majority of recent
testing conducted by WSTF and others involved the combustion of
cylindrical rods.
In normal gravity, it has been shown that, an
increase in rod diameter will be accompanied by a decrease in the
regression rate of the melting interface (ref. 2).
Experimentation in normal gravity has also shown that a decrease
in the ambient oxygen pressure will also result in a decrease in
the regression rate of the melting interface (ref. 2).
Experimental
Complete details of the experimental system design, equipment,
certification, ignition event, and operation both in normal
gravity at WSTF and microgravity at LeRC are given in ref. 4.
The oxygen used at both WSTF and LeRC was 99.5% pure (min.) and
the oxygen environment was static at the beginning of a test
except for the slight free-convective effects induced by the
ignition event. The metals and alloys tested, to date, include
rods of iron, 316 stainless steel, 2219 aluminum, titanium,
nickel 200, Monel K-500, copper, and tungsten.
Thin and thick
sheets and meshes of 316 stainless steel were also tested.
Results and Discussion
Figure la shows a molten ball, just after detachment, that was
formed on the end of a 0.32-cm-diameter cylindrical iron rod
burning at 6.9 MFa in normal gravity. The melting interface is
the contact area between the solid rod and the formed molten ball
(while still attached to the rod). The molten ball grows as
energy is transferred from the combustion process to the solid

274

-

'-

'~

"------

rod and the melting interface moves upward. This process
proceeds, in normal gravity, until the molten ball detaches from
the solid rod and a new molten ball is formed.
The detachment of
the molten ball occurs when the gravitat ional force exceeds the
sum of the adhesion and surface tension forces which hold the
molten ball to the solid rod.
As stated, at the beginning of testing it was unclear as to
whether metallic materials would support combustion without
gravity. It was quickly determined that the metallic materials
tested do support combustion under microgravity conditions
similar to conditions that support combustion in normal gravity.
Figure lb shows the microgravity combustion of the equivalent
experiment shown in Fig. 1a . The 2.2 seconds of microgravity
time would have been equivalent to approximately five growth-anddetachment cycles in normal gravity. Instead of detaching in
microgravity, the molten ball continues to accumulate mass until
impact at the bottom of the drop tower occurred. Upon impact,
now in normal gravity, the rod would not extinguish but would
continue to burn until completely consumed.
Several differences between the normal gravity and microgravity
burning of the metal rods were apparent and include 1) the change
in shape of the molten ball from a teardrop to a near perfect
sphere, 2) the change in the shape of the melting interface from
a cirCUlar section to an elliptical section which results in a
larger attachment area, and 3) in microgravity the molten ball i s
often observed to precess around the rod as it burns (equivalent
to the instability leading to spinning deflagration) .
Calculation of regression rates of the melting interface in
normal gravity is accomplished by monitoring the upward movement
of the horizontal melting interface from a photographic record of
the burning event.
In microgravity, the regression rate of the
melting i nterface is calculated by first representing the melting
interface by a slanted line with start point and end po i nt
defined by the intersection of the molten ball and the solid rod.
By monitoring the midpoint of this line as the melting i nterface
progresses up the rod, a value of the regression rate can be
obtained . As described in the background, in normal gravity, the
regression rate of the melting interface increases with
increasing oxygen pressure or decreasing rod diameter. This
trend is also true during the microgravity combustion of metallic
rods. Though a similar dependency of the regression rate as a
function of rod diameter and oxygen pressure is shown between
normal gravity and microgravity, there is a significant
difference between the absolute regression rates. The regression
rate of the melting interface greatly increases, for similar
experimental conditions, during microgravity conditions. This
increased regression rate, rod diameter dependency, and oxygen
pressure dependency, as a function of gravity level, for the iron
system, is shown in Fig. 2.
It has also been shown (ref. 5) that the molten ball formed on a
275

burning iron rod (0. 32-cm-diameter) at 6.9 MFa oxygen pressure,
in normal gravity, contains excess oxygen above stoichiometric
requirements (for the formation of FeO). This result is also
true during the microgravity combustion of iron over a pressure
range between 1.7 and 8.6 MFa.
The combustion of a 0.32-cm-diameter 2219 aluminum rod shows a
combustion zone that is similar in shape, growth, and progression
up the rod as seen with the iron rods.
It is different with
regards to total luminosity (more) and the quantity of volatile
products surrounding the combustion zone.
During the microgravity combustion of 316 stainless steel (rods ,
sheets and meshes), which physically appears to burn identical to
the iron, there was a fine olive green powder residue deposited
throughout the chamber. This phenomena does not occur during
similar experiments in normal gravity. This powder was
collected, analyzed by x-ray diffraction, and shown to be
chromium oxide (Cr20 3 ) . This result suggests that the temperature
of the molten ball during microgravity combustion is greater than
for combustion in normal gravity and leads to the volatilization
of chromium or chromium oxides. As the molten ball grows in
microgravity, the molten ball retains more of the heat that is
generated by combustion and results in a higher temperature.
This increase in temperature is consistent with the increase in
the regression rates also exhibited in microgravity.
Different shapes were burned in microgravity to compare
configurational effects to similar normal gravity tests . One
such test was a thin sheet of 316 stainless steel at 6.9 MFa
oxygen pressure which, in normal gravity, extinguishes at this
pressure. As the molten mass accumUlates in normal gravity it
detaches and residual thermal energy is lost at a faster rate
than it is generated and so the burning extinguishes.
In
microgravity, this sample shape burns until the entire sample is
consumed since the molten mass does not detach from the sheet.
T'ien (ref. 6) has hypothesized the probability of a change in
the flammability of a material when the burning event is moved
from normal gravity to microgravity, but no experimental
evidence, until this study, has verified this hypothesis.
Copper, nickel 200, and Monel K-500 are three materials that hav e
been shown at WSTF to be nonflammable (0.32-cm-diameter rods) in
normal gravity up to oxygen pressures of 69.5 MFa.
In
microgravity, these materials all appeared to burn at oxygen
pressures as low as 6.9 MPa, but the test time of 2.2 seconds did
not allow adequate time to allow propagation of the burning event
for a significant distance along the sample rod. The burning
copper rod is shown in Fig. lc.
Conclusions and future work
Metals and alloys burn readily in microgravity environments which

276

I

I

L

indicates adequate circulation in the formed molten mass to
ensure fuel-oxidizer mixing. Under similar experimental
conditions, rods that burn in normal gravity burn faster in
microgravity.
Sample shapes (sheets) that extinguish in normal
gravity burned completely under similar microgravity conditions.
Sample materials that do not burn in normal gravity at very high
oxygen pressure burn in microgravity at substantially lower
oxygen pressure for the 2.2 seconds of test time. A similar
dependency between regression rate of the melting interface and
oxygen pressure and rod diameter exists in normal gravity and
microgravity.
316 stainless steel (rods, meshes, and sheets)
produced volatile combustion products when burning in
microgravity which does not occur in normal gravity. All of
these observations are consistent with the implied observation
that the temperature in the molten ball in microgravity is
greater than in normal gravity.
Excess oxygen, above
stoichiometric requirements, is contained in the molten ball
formed on iron rods both in normal gravity and microgravity.
There are several areas of emphasis for future work. More
configuration testing and new material testing is also needed.
The solution of a metals combustion model for iron (condensedphase burning material) in microgravity is also proceeding which
will result in determination of the activation energy,
preexponential factor, and other parametric values needed for the
characterization of the burning iron system. A stability
analysis on the combustion phenomena at both the melting
interface and the reaction zone is ongoing. The study of gravity
effects on nonmetals which burn with surface flames (Teflon and
graphite-filled polymers) is also anticipated future work.
References
1)

Stoltzfus, J.M., et. al., in Flammability and sensitivity of
Materials in Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres: Third Volume, ASTM
STP 986, D.W. Schroll, Ed., American society for Testing and
Materials, Philadelphia, 1988, pp. 28-53.

2)

steinberg, T.A., et. al., in Flammability and Sensitivity of

Materials in oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres: Fourth Volume,
ASTM STP 1040 (J.M. stoltzfus, F.J. Benz, and J.S.
stradling, Eds.), American society for Testing and
Materials, Philadelphia, 1989, pp. 54-75.

3)

steinberg, T.A., et. al., Combust. Flame, accepted.

4)

steinberg, T.A., Ph.D. dissertation, NMSU, Las Cruces, N.M.,
May, 1990; Univ. Micro., Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, 91-01023, 5108B, Dissertation Abstracts, p. 4021.

5)

Steinberg, T.A., et. al., Combust. Flame, 88:309-320 (1992).

6)

T'ien, J.S., Presented at the International Microgravity
2Combustion Workshop, LeRC, Cleveland , OH, Jan. 25-26, 1989.

277

0.45 s

a)

1.16 s

b)

c)

1.15 s

Figure 1.- - Molten ball formed on a burning 0.32 ~m-diameter rod in pure oxygen, a) iron in normal gravity
(just after ball detachment-6.9 MPa), b) iron in microgravity (6 .9 MPa) and, c) copper in microgravity (8.1
MPa). The white lines were added to the photographs to show the boundaries of the rods.

80

o

o
Mi c rogravily
Diam e l e r

v

o

Imm
/),. 2 mm

u

o

(1)

.....

3mm

~ 50

...>

C

o

bD

.5 40
...>

o
No rmal Gravity

-'

V

-

:::E
.....
o

SATO·
WSTF
Di am e ler
Imm

-

v 30

...>
(1)

~

C

.S:
Ul

Figure 2.-- Comparison of regression rate of
melting interface between normal gravity
(mild steel and iron) and microgravity
(iron) as a function of oxygen pressure and
rod diameter. '"From Sato, J. in
Flammability and Sensitivity of MaJerials
in Oxygen-Enriched Atmospheres: Fifth
Volume, ASTM STP 1040 (J. Stoltzfus,
F .J . Benz, and J. Stradling, Eds.),
American Society for Testing and
Materials, Philadelphia, 1989, pp. 162167.

2mm

20

Ul

v

_ - - - - 3 mm

~

bD
V
~

10

o

o

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

II

12

13

Oxygen Pressure (MPa)

278
_I

COMMENTS
Question (R. Friedman, Factory Mutual) : What procedure did you use to ignite your sample?
Answer: The microgravity combusti on test at LeRC had two different ignition procedures. In th l' first
procedure, th e ignition of the test samples occurred befor e th e drop began, in order that the coillbustion
could be observed during a transiti on from norm al gravity to mi crogravity. The second initi a tioll procedure
ignit ed the test sample after free-fa ll (microgravity conditions) was established, in o rd er to evalu ;lte a rod's
combustion in m icrogravity alone .
All expe riments were ignited by small amounts of Pyro[uze wire wrapped around the bottom or I he sa mple.
The Pyrofuze wire was ignited by resistive heating and had a negligible effect on the surroundings.

279

SESSION G - DROPLET AND SPRAY COMBUSTION
(Chair, Forman Williams)

Preceding Page Blank

STUDIES OF DROPLET BURNING AND EXTINCTION
FA Williams
Department of Applied Mechanics and Engineering Sciences
University of California , San Diego
La Jolla, California 92093-0310

Introduction
A project on droplet combustion, pursued jointly with F.L. Dryer of Princeton University, has
now been in progress for many years. The project involves experiments on the burning of single
droplets in various atmospheres, mainly at normal atmospheric pressure and below, performed in
drop towers (e.g., ref. 1) and designed to be performed aboard space-based platforms such as the
Space Shuttle or the Space Station. It also involves numerical computations on droplet burning,
performed mainly at Princeton, and asymptotic analyses of droplet burning, performed mainly at
UCSD. The focus of the studies rests primarily on time-dependent droplet-burning characteristics
and on extinction phenomena.
The presentation to be given here concerns the recent research on application of asymptotic
methods to investigation of the flame structure and extinction of hydrocarbon droplets. These
theoretical studies are investigating the extent to which combustion of higher hydrocarbons heptane , in particular - can be described by four-step reduced chemistry of the kind that has
achieved a good degree of success for methane flames. The studies (refs. 2,3, and 4) have progressed
to a point at which a number of definite conclusions can now be stated. These conclusions and the
reasoning that led to them are outlined here.
Asymptotic Descriptions of Diffusion Flames
A mixture fraction Z (ref. 5), defined to be zero in the oxidizer and unity in the fuel, serves as
an attractive independent variable for analyses of diffusion-flame structures because its adoption
enables the problem to be formulated in a universal manner that does not depend on the specific
geometrical configuration. However, a unique Z exists only if all relevant Lewis numbers are
unity. It has been argued (ref. 3) that for droplet burning, in the transport zones away from the
stoichiometric mixture fraction Ze, Lewis numbers of unity are reasonable approximations , mainly
because those for oxygen and products in the outer zone are close enough to unity, while in the fuel
zone only the fuel specific heat is relevant (since no other species are transported there ), and this is
large enough to counteract the small fuel diffusion coefficient, again giving the Lewis number close
to unity. It is important to account for Lewis numbers different from unity in the thin reaction zone
centered at Z = Ze, but this can be done without difficulty and without affecting the definition
of Z, so long as this zone is thin in the mixture-fraction coordinate. Thus, the droplet-burning
problem is formulated in terms of the mixture fraction (ref. 2, 3, and 4).
In the mixture-fraction formulation, the simplest asymptotic description is the Burke-Schumann
reaction-sheet structure, shown by the straight lines labeled "equilibrium" in figure 1. This limit
corresponds to an infinite Damkohler number for one-step, irreversible chemistry and provides

Preceding Page Blank
283

t he outer, transport-zone solutions to which the reaction-zone solutions are matched . Figure 1
illustrates that in the reaction zone there is a one-parameter family of solutions, the parameter
being Xe, the value at stoichiometry of the scalar dissipation rate
(1)
where D is the (local, variable, common) diffusion coefficient ofthe outer solutions. As X e increases ,
the peak temperature decreases, and eventually an abrupt extinction is approached, at a critical
value of Xc. Figure 1 illustrates this qualitatively on the basis of activation-energy asymptotics
(AEA); after extinction the solution is the frozen one given by the dashed lines.
When the mixture-fraction formulation is employed, the distinction between different geometrical configurations arises only through the expression for the scalar dissipation, X. For a stagnant
mixing layer of thick ness, I
(2)
X = 2D/I ,
while for constant-density counterflow mixing wit h a normal-componen t strain rate K
oxidizer stream

0

in t he

(3)
in which erfc l denotes th e inverse (not the reciprocal) of t he complementary error function. It
has recently been shown (ref. 6) that for small Ze, t he usual case encountered in practice, variabledensit y effects can be included reasonably by placing on the right-hand side of equation (3 ) the
addi tional factor

(4)
where Po is the density of the oxidizing stream and Pe that at the stoichiometric flame sheet. For
droplet burning (ref. 2) it is found that

X

= 8D {[In(1 - Z))2 (1 _ Z)}2
In(1 + B)

dr

(5)

where dl is t he droplet diameter , and B is the transfer numb er for the droplet combustion process,
given in an approximation of constant specific heat c p by

(6)
where T , W , and Y denote temperature, molecular weight , and mass fraction , the subscript 00
identifies the ambient atmosphere, L is the energy required to vaporize a unit mass of fuel , Q
stands for the heat released per mole of gaseous fuel in combustion , and n represents the number of
carbon atoms in the alkane. By use of equation (5) at Z = Ze, the drople t diameter at extinction
dIe, can be obtained from Xee, the value of Xc at extinction , which has been calculated without
reference to the specific geometrical configuration.
Figure 2 illustra.tes how figure 1 is modified by reduced chemistry. This figure pertains to a twostep approximation in which the react ion zone is split in to two parts , a fuel-consumption zone and
an oxidizer-consumption zone. The asymptotic analyses have addressed fl ame st ructures in t wostep , t hree-step , and four-step approximations. Qualitative illustra.t ions of resulting concentration
and temperature profiles in physical space are shown in figure 3, in which C 2 H 2 is one represent ative
of numerous intermediate fuel species.

284

Reduced Chemistry
Systematic reductions to four-step mechanisms for alkanes result in the reduced chemistry

Cn H 2n+2 + 'YH + [I' - (n + 1 + ~'Y)] H20

-~

[I' - (n

+ {n - ~a

+ 1 + ~'Y)]} O 2 ~ aCO + I'H2 + (n CO

+ H20:: C02 + H2,
~

2H +M
O2 + 3H2

::

(7)
(8)

(9)

H2 +M,

2H

a)C02,

+ 2H2 0.

(10)

Equations (7), (8), (9), and (10) describe the fuel-consumption, water-gas shift (or CO-consumption),
radical-recombination, and oxygen-consumption (radical-production) steps, respectively, and they
proceed mainly at the rates of the elementary steps

CnH2n +2 + H

~

Cn H2n+1

+ H 2,

CO+OH::C0 2 +H,
H

+ O2 + M

~

H0 2 + M,

(11)

(12)
(13)

and

H+0 2 ::OH+0,

(14)

respectively. The values of the constants a,l', and 'Y in equation (7) depend on the chemical-kinetic
description of the fuel chemistry. Studies (refs. 3 and 4) have shown that theoretical predictions are
especially sensitive to the value of 'Y, the number of radicals destroyed for each fuel molecule that
is consumed. It may be expected that the larger 'Y is, the lower will be the radical concentration
and the less robust the flame.
For methane (n = 1), the summation

CH 4 + H
CH3 +0
CH 20 + H
CHO+M
H+OH
H + H2 O
CH 4 + 2H + H2 O

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

CH3 + H2
CH2 0 + H
CHO + H2
CO+H+M
0+H2
OH+H 2
CO + 4H2

with the steps dictated by the need to cancel all steady-state species through their fastest reactions
results in a = 1, I' = 4, and 'Y = 2. Even excluding the second of these steps by assuming
(erroneously) that 2CH3 + M ~ C2H6 + M is very fast and that ethane chemistry therefore
controls the fuel consumption gives only 0' = ~,I' = 3, and 'Y = 1, that is, the number of radicals
consumed is decreased by just a factor of two. Consequently there is relatively little significant
uncertainty in step (7) for methane. However, for a larger alkane, such as heptane, there is a large
difference, depending on whether the fuel chemistry follows a propene path after step (11), namely,

(15)

285

(overall), as proposed by Warnatz, or an ethene path ,
(16)
(overall) as favored by Dryer. The propene path gives a = 7, {3 = 20, and I = 10, while the ethene
path gives a = 4, {3 = 13, and I = 2, a factor of five difference in the number of radicals consumed.
This large factor turns out to have a large influence on the scalar dissipation at extinction because
the much greater extent of consumption of radicals by fuel in the propene path leads to extinction
much earlier. Since uncertainties in the detailed fuel chemistry of higher hydrocarbons do not
enable a selection to be made between the propene and ethene paths, for example, at present, it
is concluded that further study of elementary steps and mechanisms in alkane fuel chemistry is
needed.
In the present work (ref. 4) experimental results on extinction of burning heptane pools were
employed along with the asymptotic theory for the four-step description to infer what value of I
is needed to best fit the data. In this manner, it was found that I = 13 is close to the optimum
selection. This suggests that revisions in equations (15) or (16) or in the propene and ethene
consumption mechanisms are needed if agreement with extinction experiments is to be achieved.
Computations were made not only with the four-step mechanism but also with a three-step
mechanism, obtained from the four-step description by putting the H atom in steady state, and wit h
a two-step mechanism, obtained from the three-step description by imposing partial equilibrium
on step (8). There were large differences in the resulting predictions of heptane flame structures
and extinction, much larger than for methane. For example, differences in the scalar dissipation at
extinction exceeded a facto r of ten, in contrast to being less than a factor of two for methane. It
is concluded that the higher hydrocarbons are more sensitive to the kinetic descriptions and that
therefore experiments on flame structures and extinction for these fuels may provide information
of greater relevance to the chemical kinetics.
Flame Structure and Extinction
In the two-step approximation, the structure is as illustrated in figure 2, with the fuel-consumption
zone thin compared with the oxygen-consumption zone, which in turn occupies an asymptotically
small range of Z. In the three-step approximation, nonequilibrium of step (8) occurs in a portion of
the oxygen-consumption zone adjacent to the fuel-consumption zone, provided that the Damkohler
number for this step is large enough , which it is for the propene path but not for the ethene path.
If the ethene path without modification is correct (which seems quite unlikely ), then an alternative
analysis , paralleling that of Bui-Pham, Seshadri, and Williams for the premixed methane flame
with slow CO oxidation , will be needed, but it does not appear that the correct fuel chemistry for
alkane diffusion flames will require this. In the four-step approximation, the thin fuel-consumption
zone itself has substructure. There are two limiting behaviors of this substructure, as illustrated in
figures 4 and 5. When H has a strong tendency to achieve steady state, as was found for methane,
there is a thin radical-consumption layer within the fuel-consumption layer, as illustrated in figure
4, where the nondimensional thickness of the fuel-consumption layer is b, and the parameter J.L, (ref.
4) involving ratios of reaction rates in the rate-ratio asymptotic analysis (RRA) is large. When this
tendency is weak (J.L small), the situation illustrated in figure 5 occurs, in which there is a diffusion
flame between radicals and fuel within this inner layer - a diffusion flame within the diffusion flame.
The results (ref. 4) show hep tane to lie strongly in this last regime (J.L - 0).
Predictions of the location Zo and outer-solution temperature TO of the inner fuel-consumption
zone are of interest. For heptane, contrary to the relative location illustrated in figure 2, the

286

two-step and three-step descriptions give Zo on the oxidizer side of Zc for most values of Xc, in
particular at extinction. Tills disagrees with experiment and also with the predictions of the fourstep mecha.nism, which place Zo on the fuel side, as illustrated in figure 2, even at extinction. The
temperature TO of this fuel-consumption zone also is more realistic with the four-step mechanism,
as illustrated in figure 6. Thus, in every respect, the four-step description is much better than
simpler descriptions for higher hydrocarbons.
From Xce, equation (5) is used to calculate extinction diameters. Results are shown in figures 7
and 8. Figure 7, for the propene route, clearly shows the large differences obtained with different
degrees of reduction of the chemistry. The most reasonable values probably are close to the twostep prediction, fortuitously through cancellations of errors, but until heptane droplet extinction
is observed experimentally, this conclusion is not certain. If the four-step predictions in figure 7
are correct, then it is unlikely that droplet extinction can be observed experimentally, because the
droplets will become too small. If 'Y = 13 in equation (7), then the four-step predictions fall much
closer to those shown for the two-step predictions. Comparison of the three· step results shown
in figure 8 for the propene and ethene routes shows the extremely large difference in extinction
diameters for these two descriptions C'Y = 10 versus 'Y = 2); calculations with two-step and fourstep chemistry for the ethene route gave essentially zero extinction diameters. It seems likely
that many more than two radicals are destroyed for each heptane molecule consumed, but further
chemical studies are needed to determine how many.
Future Plans
It is pla.nned to investigate the fuel chemistry further, in an effort to determine better t he values of
the parameters a,{3, and 'Y. It is also planned to initiate similar asymptotic analyses for alcohol fuel
droplets. Finally, microgravity experiments on alkane droplet extinction in different atmospheres
are planned, to test predictions.
References
1. Choi, M.Y., Dryer, F.L., Card, J.M. , Williams, F.A., Haggard , J.B ., Jr. , and Borowski , B.A. ,
"Microgravity Combustion of Isolated n·Decane and n-Heptane Droplets," AIAA Paper No.
92-242, January, 1992.

2. Card, J .M. and Williams, F.A., "Asymptotic Analysis of the Structure and Extinction of Spherically Symmetrical n-Heptane Diffusion Flames," Combustion Science and Technology 84
(1992) 91-120.
3. Card, J.M. and Williams, F.A., "Asymptotic Analysis with Reduced Chemistry for t he Burning
of n-Heptane Droplets," Combustion and Flame, to appear, 1992.

4. Card, J .M., "Asymptotic Analysis for the Burning of n-Heptane Droplets using a Four-Step
Reduced Mechanism," Combustion and Flame, submitted, 1992.
5. Williams, F.A., "Combustion Theory," Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 1985.
6. Kim, J .S. and Williams, F.A., "Structures of Flow and Mixture-Fraction Fields for Counterflow
Diffusion Flames with Small Stoichiometric Mixture Fractions," Combustion Science and
Technology, submitted, 1992.

287

(,ON'JECTIV[- R(ACTlV(-

COHV£CTlV[-

DlFfUSIV(

DlFF\ISIV(

ZONE

ZONE

~OX YGEN-CONSUt.lPTION

DlFfUSIVt

ZONE

ZONE

I

FUEL-CONSUMPTION ZONE
I
INCRUSIHG Xc
OTINCTION (l[A)

T
e

o

Z

Figure 2.- Schematic diagram of the flame structure
in the mixture-fraction coordinate for tw~step
reduced chemistry.

Z

1.- Scbem&1ic diauam of Ole flame struc1ure in the m:ix1urefrx1ioII coordina1.e for ooe-Cep empirical Arrbc:nius chemisuy.
ahowin« fuel (F'), OX)'Zen (0,). and lempera1u~ protileL.
t~

- - - - r..k:aI_"-"",, 0( II - - - - - - -

...
.

: ~ DISicaI
:

:.

::

=_ij><iuo•..,.

'"

C
,H,.

Q~~-------------------,

t

o

Figure 4.- Schematic illustration of inner-layer
structure when there is a strong tendency for H to
be in steady state.

-x

1
200 -

.

~

900

~

600

-- ..... ------

m

-----------

°O~~~~2~~~-4~~~~
DISTANCE (mml .

Figure 3.- Schema.tic illustration
oC implicalion8 oC theory concerning heptane flame. structure in

z.
z
Figure 5.- Schematic illustration of inner-layer
structure when there is a weak tendency for H to be
in steady state.

physical coordinates.

288

l ____ _

v AAlAtlONS ClIHHD·zaq TDoCPDA'I\IU AT £X11IoICTIOH

WHUI,-,_

WI'Tli S1'OIOIIC»o4En ~ RlAcnoH

IQr---------------------------~
1l1li

IlaD

~IC)

1l1li

,lQD~--------------------------~
0_
04

o.os,

0.00'

.,.

z.
Figure 6.- Dependence of the inner-zoDe
temperature at extiDction on the stoichiometric
mixture fraction (varied by dilution ) for the propene
path at Dormal atmospheric pressure and
temperature.

EXTINCTION DlAM£T£R £STlMArrs
I~ r---~----------------------~

u

0.1

0_12

0. 1'

.

0_1'

0...

0.2

o.ll

Xc,-

Figure 7.- Predicted dependence of the beptane
extiDction diameter OD the oxygen mole fraction in
the ambient gas for the propene pat h.

EXTINCTION DlAM£T£R £ST1MArrs

I ~r---------------------------~

0. 12

0 . 11

0.10

02

0.22

Xc,-

F igure 8.- P redicted dependence of the heptane
f;xtiDction diameter on t he oxygen mole fraction in
the ambient gas for both propene and ethene routes.

289

COMMENTS
Question (Ray Edelman, Rockwell International): I would expect burning rate and ext inction , in particular,
would depend strongly on soot formation and the attendant radiation loss on reducing temperature. This
might be enha nced at high pressures. Could you comment on what yo ur daw s hows and how yo u reconcile
this with yo ur analyses? Do competing effects balance this with enhanced kinetics at increasing pressure?
Answer: Our studies are at normal atmospheric pressures and at reduced pressures, not at high pressures.
For our small single droplets under these conditions, radiant transfer associated with soot form ation probably
is negligible . At high pressures it will become more important , but temperature reduction thro ugh radiant
e nergy loss still could be a perturbation because of the small size.

290
I

_J

COMPUTATIONAL/EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF ISOLATED, SINGLE
COMPONENT DROPLET COMBUSTION
Frederick L. Dryer
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton , New Jersey 08544-5263
Introduction
Isolated droplet combustion processes have been the subject of extensive experimental and theoretical investigations for nearly 40 years. The
gross features of droplet burning are qualitatively embodied by simple theories and are relatively well understood (e.g. ref. I ). However, there
remain significant aspects of droplet burning, particularly its dynamics, for which additional basic knowledge is needed for thorough interpretations
and quantitative explanations oftransient phenomena. Spherically-symmetric droplet combustion, which can only be approximated underconditions
of both low Reynolds and Grashof numbers, represents the simplest geometrical configuration in which to study the coupled chemicalJtransport
processes inherent within non-premixed flames. Microgravity droplet combustion can closely approximate these conditions, while also giving
insights as to how coupling of the above processes is affected by the absence of gravitational forces. Advances in both asymptotic and numerical
computational abilities a\1ow more recent analyses of droplet burning to include considerably refined descriptions of the transport and chemical
effects, par1icularly if the spherically symmetric assumption can be maintained. While such improvements in theory represent significant promise
for future advances, experimental data available for comparison with theory, without corrections for convective effects, remain relatively limited.
The research summarized here, concerns recent results on isolated, single component, droplet combustion under microgravity conditions, a program
pursued jointly with F.A. Williams of the University of California. San Diego. The overa\1 program involves developing and applying
experinlenlal methods 10 study the burning of isolated, single component droplets, in various atmospheres, primarily at atmospheric pressure and
below, in both drop towers and aboard space-based platforms such as the Space Shuttle or Space Station (e.g. refs. 2-4). Both computational
methods (e.g. ref. 5) and asymptotic methods, the latter pursued mainly at UCSD, (see preceding paper), are used in developing the experimental
test matrix, in analyzing results, and for extending theoretical understanding. Methanol, and the normal alkanes, n-heptane, and n-decane, have
been selected as test fuels to study time-dependent droplet burning phenomena. The following sections summarize the Princeton efforts on this
program, describe work in progress, and briefly delineate future research directions.
Methanol
Methanol is thermophysically, thermochemically, and kinetically, the most well characterized ofliquid fuels. Methanol bums diffusively without
the production of soot and a number of its combustion intermediates and products, notably water and formaldehyde, are highly soluble in the fuel
(refs. 2,7,8). As a result, spherically symmetric modeling of methanol droplet combustion is especially amenable to time-dependent, computational
studies which include detailed multi-component transport, thermo-chemistry, and chemical kinetics (ref. 6). Thus, methanol is an ideal fuel
selection for providing benchmark comparisons of theory and experiment.
Util izing the Chemica\1y Reacting Flow Model (CRFM) developed at Princeton (ref. 5), computational studies have been performed including
multi-component transport (ref.9), and detailed kinetics (ref. 10). Calculations were compared with experimental data generated in the 2.2 second
drop tower (ref 6) and with ground-based laboratory experiments (refs. 2,8). Droplet gasification rate, flame position, and extinction were shown
to be affected by species absorption and dissolution into the liquid phase. The non-linear behavior of the square of the droplet diameter with time
and the extinction diameter calculated for the combustion of a methanol droplet in 50% helium/50% oxygen mixtures at atmospheric pressure
compare well with 2.2 second drop tower experiments. Calculated flame temperature profiles suggest temperature is an insensitive parameter
for experimenta\1y defming flame position. However, experimental measurements of gas phase [OH], and [CH20] profiles would apparently
penn it accurate determination of the oxidizer and fuel consumption regions (i.e. flame structure) as well as position.
Additional ground-based experimental and computational work is planned on both pure methanol and methanol-water droplets to further develop
fundamental understanding and a space-based test matrix. One-g suspended and free droplet studies have been performed at Princeton on
methanol-water mill.1ures which show interesting effects of initial water content on extinction diameter (refs. 2,7,8). Both 2.2 second and 5 second
tower studies are scheduled, pending availability of the NASA-Lewis 2.2 second drop-package and the refurbishment of the ~ . O second tower
facility. Computational development of full-flight and ground-test matrices for methanol droplet studies (similar to those described below for
n-heptane) require further refinement of the detailed chemistry utilized in the model (ref. 10), particularly its pressure-dependent characteristics.
Kinetic model refmements are presently underway, based on other recently published studies (refs. 11-13), and a new variable pressure (1-15
atm.) flow reactor study recently concluded in the authors laboratory (ref. 14). Finally, a reduced mechanism for methanol diffusion flames
remains to be developed to assist in parallel asymptotic studies.
Nonnal Alkanes
Nonnal-heptane and n-decane have been utilized in many prior droplet burning studies, both in earth's gravitational field (e.g. ref. 15) and in
droptowers (e.g. ref. 16). Under microgravity droplet combustion conditions, both exhibit significant soot formati on and accumulation (by

291

thermophoresis) within the surrounding diffusion flame (refs. 17,18). The ·sootshell" thus formed and the soot agglomerate densities within it
are strongly influenced by ambient pressure, oxygen indices, and diluent species (refs. 2,8). as well as by initial droplet size (ref. 19) IIId relative
gas/droplet convection (refs. 8,18). Associated with the formation and presence of the 8ootshel1, is a reduced droplet gasification nd.e that can
be as much as 40"10 lower than observed in early drop tower measurements at similar drop sizes (no sootshells present). The burning rate data
increase with measured relative gas/droplet convection rate (ref. 18), and recent experiments (refs. 2,8) show that, contrary to classical theory, the
gasification rate is increased significantly by pressure reduction (through reduced sooting). No fundamental theory has been conclusively
established for these effects, but it has been suggested that radiation losses from the sootshell, changes in the temperature-averaged transport
properties, and changes in gas-phase volume flux due to soot formation are possible sources of effects which change both the surface gasification
rate and flame position (refs. 2,18).
Over some ranges of experimental parameters, droplet disruption and dismemberment is also observed to occur early in the droplet bumiug history
(refs. 8,17,18), while over other ranges of conditions, droplet extinction is observed to occur. Speculations for the mechanisms which produce
disruption are: deposition of high-molecular-weight soot precursor intermediates in the liquid phase, resulting in multi-compoocot droplet
gasification behavior (ref. 17); collapse of the diffusion flame structure into the soot shell, causing intense disturbances from the lOOt shell
ignition.; soot deposition at the liquid surface; and critical electrostatic charge accumulation in the soot shell and/or droplet surface (refs. 2,8).
Recent experiments at one-g suggest that deposition of high molecular weight components is insignificant (ref. 2,8). and a clear explanation of
the disruption phenomena remains to be established.
Unfortunately, thermo physical, thermochemical, and chemical kinetic properties for these alkanes are not very well defUled (ref. 2). Experimental
values of thermophysical parameters have been determined only at low temperatures, and theoretical evaluations based on ideal gas properties
to guide extrapolations to flame temperatures are in significant disagreement (ref. 2). More importantly, the detailed kinetic mechanisma for large
alkanes are only qualitatively understood (ref. 20). A 96 step semi-empirical mechanism has been proposed by Wamatz for predicting laminar
pre-mixed flame propagation (ref. 21) for n-heptane-air flames, and this worle has formed the basis for several studies on diffusion flames and
reduced model development (refs. 4,22). The principal empiricism is the description of n-heptyl radical decomposition into the unlikely products
of CH, + 2 C,H, (in fixed ratio) rather than the expected mixture of ~scission products, ClH•• ClH,. C,H.. C.H.. CH" and C,H,. (ref. 20). ~ vhich
are, in fact, evidenced in n-heptane-air diffusion flame structures (ref. 23) and flow reactors (ref. 24). More complex detailed kinetic mechanisms
have been developed for autoignition studies in engines (up to SOOO reaction steps), but these mechanism involve considerable uncertainty and
low and intermediate oxidation chemistry of little relevance in diffusion flames. However, as a means of developing ground- and apace-based
experimental test matrices, initial computations have been performed using the CRFM and two step semi-empirical kinetics with reversible CO/COl
chemistry (refs. 3,4,8). Numerical constants in the kinetic mechanism were adjusted to reproduce suspended droplet extinction diameter data (ref.
2S) of n-heptane at low pressure (no soot formation), and calculations were performed to determine the burning characteristics of isolated
n-heptane droplets under various ambient pressures, oxygen indices, diluents (nitrogen, helium), and initial diameters.
Figure I is typical of results from parametric calculations in which the ignition energy (magnitude) and (spatial) deposition parameters were varied
for droplet burning in helium (refs. 3,4,8). The displayed function represents the minimum droplet size for which any amount of ignition energy
specified would not produce ignition. At this droplet size, transport to the ambient and vaporization removed ignition energy from flammable
regions at a rate more rapid than the chemical heat release rates anywhere surrounding the droplet region. As the critical ignition diameter
increases. the amount of energy required to achieve ignition also increases. At the maximum critical ignition diameters displayed in the figures,
no ign iti on energy could be found wh.ich would initiate droplet combustion. Experimentally, the critical ignition diameter must be large in
comparison to the calculated extinction diameter. (Critical ignition energy predictions are unique to time-dependent computations.) Figure 2
displays calculated extinction diameter as a function of ambient pressure and oxygen index in helium diluent (refs. 3,4,8). Extinction diameter
increases with decreasing pressure and with substitution of helium for nitrogen, i.e. by increasing the diffusivity relative to chemical kinetic
conditions. Calculated results are similar to values (within 20%) from asymptotic analyses with 2-step (propene intermediate) reduced chemistry
(see preceding paper, this woricshop and refs. 3,4,8). Combined with the characteristic times required for various experimental procedures (e.g.,
droplet growth and deployment), and combustion properties (e.g. controlled sooting by selection of appropriate pressure, diluent. and oxygen
indices) a test matrix envelope have been developed for proposing ground- and space-based microgravity experiments, e.g. Fig. 3 (Refs. 3,4,8).
As noted above, soot formation and accumulation effects are important factors in determining the buming characteristics of droplets. No
theoretical model presently exists which explicitly includes sooting. Previous investigations have addressed the formation of the sootshell by
balancing thermophoretic and viscous drag forces acting on a soot particle (refs. 26,17). However, the lack of detailed information regarding the
distribution of the gas-phase transport and thermophysical properties prevented accurate determination of the sootshell position. Using the
simplified chemistry for n-heptane described above (with no soot formation mechanism included) and temperature-dependent thermophysical
properties, the CRFM model was used to estimate these parameters by calculating the transient gas-phase field distributions between the droplet
surface and the flame location (ref. 8).
Once formed in the diffusion flame region, soot particles are acted upon by viscous drag (caused by Stefan flow), diffusion and thermophoresis,
i.e. particle transport caused by a temperature gradient in the surrounding gas-phase (ref. 27). Because the sootshelliocation is much closer to
the droplet surface than the flame and mass diffusion should be important only near the flame where the concentration gradients are large, this
mode of particle transport can be neglected. Waldman and Schmidt (ref. 28) analyzed the viscous drag and thermophoretic force acting on a small
spherical particle by calculating the momentum transferred per unit time to the particle by gas molecule collisions. The resulting foeoc equation,
so lved at equilibrium, gives the thermophoretic flux, p V" as

tIl'
-3\&-

P V, -

-=_~dr= ~ j{r)
4(1 +'lta./8)T

(Eq1l.. 1)

292

_J

where p is the gas density, V, is the relative velocity experienced by the particle, ~ is the viscosity, and (l is the thermal accommodation factor
which is usually assigned a value of 0.9. Note that thermophoretic /lux is independent of particle size for sizes on the order of incipient soot
particles (ref. 29), i.e. for particles that are much smaller than the mean free path. For conditions under which soot agglomeration is prevalent,
mean particle size may become much larger than the mean free path. The thermophoretic /lux formulation is then defined as (ref. 27):
(fl ·

pV,

-2Ao10 p dr
(2Ao + Ao)P = 1(r)

(Eqn.2)

where A. and \ are the thermal conductivities of the gas and the particle. The term, a, is a dimensionless constant that relates the sl ip velocity
at the particle surface and the gas-phase temperature gradient, usually assigned a value of 0.2. The thermal conductivity of soot particles was
estimated from the temperature-dependent values for amorphous carbon (ref. 30).
When the surrounding gas-phase produces a Stefan /lux, pV, equal to pV the forces acting on the particle will be counter-balanced and the
"
particles will accumulate to form the sootshell. Figure 4 displays the modeling results for the Stefan, the small-particle thermophoretic [denoted
as SPT, Eqn. 1) and the large-particle thermophoretic [denoted as LPT, Eqn. 2) velocities, plotted versus normalized radius (divided by
instantaneous droplet radius) for n-heptane burning in atmospheric pressure air. The time-dependence of mass gasification rate, droplet and /lame
dimensions and the temperature gradients will cause changes in these profiles. The results presented in Fig. 5 are typical of those produced under
the quasi-steady burning conditions. The Stefan velocity near the droplet surface is observed to increase with radial position to a maximum near
r/r. = 1.5 and then decrease monotonically. Similar behavior is also observed for the SPT velocity, which matches the Stefan velocity at a
nonnalized radius of 5.5. Considering that the calculated /lame standolT ratio is 10 (in comparison to about 8 experimentally), this prediction
is quite reasonable. The principal source of the disparity is that the calculated gasification rates are approximately 36% higher than the values
measured for the most quiescent n-heptane droplet combustion experiments. Under sooting conditions, the portions of the gasified fuel which forms
soot also possess negligible specific volume when compared to that of the gaseous species, which reduces the /lame stand-olT ratio. Scaling of
the Stefan flux by the ratio of the experimental and calculated gasification rates and incorporating the flame contraction effects by reducing the
distance between all calculated node locations by a factor of

F(t)

calculations were performed for each droplet combustion time step to determine the location of the Stefanlthermophoretic /lux equilibrium. The
model-generated soot standolTratios compare favorably with experimentally measured values (within 10%), see Fig. 5. Similar model calculations
were also performed for droplet combustion in higher oxygen indices. For the 30%, 40% and 50% oxygen concentrations in nitrogen, the
calculated soot standolT ratios were reduced to 2.65, 2.54 and 2.46, respectively (compared to measured ratios at 40% and 50% oxygen of
approximately 2.2). Similar reductions for increasing oxygen indices have also been reported in ref. 31. For all oxygen concentrations, the
calculated Stefan velocities were larger in magnitude than the minimum convective velocities required for equilibrium between viscous drag and
LPT forces (within region bounded by droplet surface and /lame front). This suggests that when larger soot agglomerates form, they should be
transported towards the /lame and eventually pass through it. This behavior was, in fact, observed in experiments at high oxygen/nitrogen ratios
(> 0.4) for both n-decane and n-heptane fue l droplets.
It appears that thennophoretic effects are unlikely to lead to soot particle deposition on the liquid surface (speculated to lead to disruption) since
viscous drag dominates very near the droplet surface. The flame would need to regress toward the droplet for a force imbalance to favor
thermophoretic soot deposition. Regression of the /lame through any part of the soot shell would expose the nascent soot particles to oxygen
and lead to violent ignition processes in the gas phase surrounding the droplet. More refined analyses which explicitly include sooting effects
will be needed to fully understand the mechanism(s) which result in reduced gasification rates and disruption. Areas of continuing interest also
include the analysis of the internal circulation likely introduced by the experimental droplet deployment mechanism, and the small, but fmite
relative gas-droplet motions produced by all known techniques for droplet deployment and ignition. Improved experimental methods to
characterize these attributes, and means to include their elTects (as well as those of sooting) in the theoretical analyses, are presently being pursued.

Recently, we have incorporated the 96 step mechanism of Wamatz (ref. 21) in CRFM, along with multi-component transport to investigate
unsteady burning behavior of n-heptane droplets, such as droplet heating before and after ignition, variation of the gasification rate and /lame
standoff ratio under limiting conditions of no droplet heating (infinitesimal heat capacity), conduction-limited heating, and infmite internal heat
conduction (rapid liquid mixing). Time dependent calculations were performed for a ) mm n-heptane droplet burning in ambient air. An initial
vaporization period, followed by ignition by imposition of a spherically symmetric hot shell were studied. Initially, the no-droplet heating
configuration was studied to investigate non-steady burning characteristics, and then more realistic liquid-phase heat transfer conditions were
included. Species profiles are shown for quasi-steady burning in Fig. 6.
The model simulations suggest that the calculated /lame stand-olT ratio continuously increases even after the gasification rate reaches 99% of the
quasi-steady value (for times tit" > 0.1, t" = total burning time), see Fig 7. This unsteadiness has been previously suggested to be due to fuel vapor
accumulation elTects between the droplet surface and the /lame (ref. 32). However, after tltb> 0.1, the rate of fuel accumulation is near zero and
eventually becomes negative due to droplet regression and /lame contraction. The initial droplet heating period is strongly influenced by internal
circulation. However, after initial transient period, the flame stand-off ratio, the gasification rate, the gas ;.hase temperature and species profiles
are not alTected by the liquid phase heat transfer mechanism, even though the internal droplet temperature distribution may continue to change

293

(Fig. 8). Flame unsteadiness, is apparently also not related to internal droplet heating and appears to result primarily from a purely transient
phenomenon associated with diffusion flame structural changes and the resulting changes in transport properties in the vicinity of the droplet.
Further calculations to study the effects of the Warnatz mechanism on extinction diameter predictions are underway.
Future Work
In the near term, areas of theoretical interest include: improvement of the chemical models utilized for both computational and asymptotic
approaches, improvement in understanding the effects of soot on droplet burning phenomena, and consideration of the low relative gas/droplet
convection (which is inherent in droplet generation, deployment, and ignition), and assessing the effects of internal circulation induced by growth,
deployment and ignition methods. Experimentally, additional efforts are underway to further reduce perturbations caused by droplet deployment
and ignition methods, and to qualitatively image some of the flame species profiles, specifically, OH. Finally, the thermo-chemical and chemical
kinetic foundations for n-heptane combustion need further improvement. As part of another study on autoignition chemistry of internal spark
ignition fue ls (e.g., see ref. 24), the author's laboratory is developing a homogenous kinetic experimental database on n-heptane oxidation which
wi ll be useful in improving and validating a more appropriate chemical mechanism for future use.
Acknowl edgements
TIle work at Princeton was supported by NASA-LeRC of Cleveland, OH. under contract number #NAS3-123I. Contributors to this research
include, Dr. S.Y. Cho, Dr. M. Y. Choi, Mr. P. Michniewicz., Mrs. Y. Stein, and Mr. J. Sivo. MYC was partially supported by the NASA
Graduate Researcher Fellowship Program from 1988-1991.
References
I. Williams, F.A. : Diffusion Flames and Droplet Burning, Combustion Theory, 2nd Ed., Benjamin/Cummings Pub!. Co., Menlo Park- CA, 1985,
p.52.
2. Choi, M.Y ., Cho, S.Y. Dryer, F.L., and Haggard, l B. Jr.: Some Further Observations on Droplet Combustion Characteristics: NASA LeRCPrinceton Results, AIAAlIKI Microgravity Science Symposium, AIAA Conference Proceedings (ISBN 1-56347-00 1-2), 1991 , p. 294.
3. Choi, M.Y., Cho, S.Y., Dryer, and Haggard, 1.B. Jr.: ComputationallExperimental Basis for Conducting Alkane Droplet Combustion
Experiments on Space-Based Platforms, TUTAM Symposium on Microgravity Fluid Mechanics, Bremmen, FRG, (Rath, H. J., ed.). SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1992, p. 337.
4. Williams, F.A., Dryer, F.L. and Haggard, 1.B. Jr.: Preliminary Science Requirements Document for the Droplet Combustion Apparatus, NASALewis Research Center, November 1, 1991.
5. Cho, S.Y., Yetter, R.A. and Dryer, F.L. : Computer Model For Chemically Reacting Flow With Complex ChemistrylMulti-Component Molecular
DiffusionlHeterogeneous Processes, Journal Of Computational Physics, 10 I, 1992. In press.
6. Cho, S.Y., Choi, M.Y. and Dryer, F.L.: The ElI.1inction ofa Free Methanol Droplet in Microgravity, Twenty-third Symposium (International)
on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, 1990, p.161l.
7. Lee, A., Law, C.K. and Makino, A .: An Experimental Investigation on the Droplet Vaporization and Combustion of Alcohol Fuels, Fall Eastern
Section Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Orlando, FL, 1990.
8. Choi, M.Y.: Droplet Combustion Characteristics under Microgravity and Normal Gravity Conditions, PhD Thesis, Dept. of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 1992, Report MAE T-1937.
9. Kee, RJ., Warnatz, 1., and Miller, 1. A.: TRANS, Sandia Nationa l Laboratories, Livermore, CA, 1983, Report No. 83-8209.
10. Norton, T.S. and Dryer, F.L. : Some Observations on Methano l Oxidat ion Chemistry, Comb. Sci. and Tech., 63, 1989, p.I07.
II. Norton, T.S. and Dryer, F.L.: Toward a Comprehensive Mechanism for Methanol Pyrolysis, Int. J. Chern. Kin., 22, 1990, p. 219.
12. Ego lfopoulos, F.N., Du, OX ., and Law, C.K. : A Comprehensive Study of Methanol Kinetics in Freely-Propagating and Burner-Stabilized
Flanles, Flow and Static Reactors, and Shock Tubes, Comb. Sci. and Tech., 83, 1992, p. 33.
13 . Grotheer" H,H" Keirn, Driver, H.S.T., Hutcheon, R.1., Lockett, R.D., and Robertson, G.N.: Elementary Reactions in the Methanol Oxidation
System. Part I: Establishment of the Mechanism and Modeling of Laminar Burning Velocities. Part II. : Measurement and Modeling of Autoignition
in a Methanol-Fuelled Otto Engine, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft, to appear in October, 1992 Issue.
14. Held, T.1.: PhD Thes is, Methano l, Iso-butene, and MBTE Oxidation in a Flow Reactor: the Effects of Ambient Pressure, Dept. of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 1992. In Preparation.
15. Law, C.K. and Williams, F.A. : Kinetics and Convection in the Combustion of Alkane Droplets, Comb. and Flame, 19, 1972, p. 393.
16. Choi M.Y., Dryer, F.L., Card, J.M., Williams, F.A., Haggard, 1.B. Jr., and Borowski, B. A.: Microgravity Combustion of Isolated n-Decane
and n-Heptane Droplets, AIAA Paper No. 92-242, January, 1992.
17. Shaw, B.D., Dryer, F.L., Willianls, F.A. and Haggard, Jr., 1.B.: Sooting And Disruption In Spherically-Symmetrical Combustion Of Decane
In Air, Acta Astronautica, 17, 1988, p. 11 95.
18. Choi, M.Y., Dryer, F.L. and Haggard, Jr., J.B.: Observation of a Slow-Burning Regime for Hydrocarbon Droplets: n-Heptane/Air Results,
Twenty-Third Symposium (International) On Combustion, The Combustion Institute, 1990, pg. 1597.
19. Jackson, G.S. and Avedisian, C.T.: Possible Effects of Initial Diameter in Spherically Symmetric Droplet Combustion of Sooting Fuels, Fall
Eastern States Technical Meeting, The Combustion Institute, Ithaca, NY, November, 1991.
20. Dryer, F.L.: The Phenomenology of Modeling Combustion Chemistry, Fossil Fuel Combustion (Bartok, W. and Sarofun, A, eds.), Wiley and
Sons, NY, 1991.
21. Warnatz, 1.: Chemistry of High Temperature Combustion of Alkanes up to Octane, Twentieth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The
Combustion Institute, 1984, p. 845.
22. Bui-Pham, M. and Sheshadri, K.: Comparison Between Experinlental Measurements and Numerical Calculations of the Structure of nHeptane-air Diffusion Flames, Comb. Sci. and Tech., 79, 199 1, p. 293.

294
I

23. Kent., 1.H. and Williams, F.A. :Extinction of Laminar Diffusion Flames for Liquid Fuels, Filkenth Symposium (International) on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, 1974, p. 31.5 .
24. Kennedy, S, Brezinsky, K. and Dryer, F. : Flow Reactor Oxidation Studies of the Extent of Reaction in Heptane/lso-octane Mixtures as a
Function of Octane Number, Eastern Sectional Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Philadelphia, PA, 198.5. Also Kennedy, S. SSE Thesis, Dept
of Chemical Engineering. Princeton University, Princeton, Nl, 1986.
2.5. Law, C.K. and Chung. S.H.: An Experimental Study of Droplet Extinction in the Absence of EXkrnal Convection, Comb. and Flame, 64,
1986. p. 237.
26. Green, G.J., Dryer, F.L, and Sangiovanni, l.J. : Cenosphere Soot AggIomeralel Formed During Low Reynolds Number Combustion Of Iwlated
Free Drop1eta, Paper presented at the 1984 Fall Eastern State& Technical Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Gaithersburg, MD, 1984.
27 Friedlander, S.K. : Smoke. Dust and Haze. Wiley &; Sons, NY, 19n.
28. Waldmann, L and Schmitt, K.H.: Thermophoreaia And Diffuaiophoresia Of Aerosols, Aerosol Science, (Davies, C.N. cd.), Academic Press,
NY, 1966, Chpt V1.
29. Palmer, ltB. and Cul1ia, H.F.: The Chemistry And Physics Of Carbon. Marcel Dekker. Vol. I, 196.5, p . 26.5.
30. Therrnophysical Properties Of Matter, (TouloulWn, Y.S. and Ho, C.Y. ,eda.), Plenum Press, NY, 1972.
31. San giovanni, 1.]. and Liscinsky, D.S .: Soot Formation Characteristica of Well Defmed Spray Flames, Twentieth Symposium (International)
On Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh. 1984, p. 1963.
32. Law, C. K~ Chung. S.H., and Srinivasan, N. : Gas Phase Quasi-Steadiness and Fuel Vapor Accumulation Effects in Droplet Burning, Comb.
and Flame, 38, 1980, p. 173.

E
~

E
0
:5
~

<J

c;
u

,

,,

J ,

l\

I

L

'.

\

,,,,I ,,,,I ,I
-----. I

\

,,

.lm

]

,

'~

..
E
.

~

\. ,

"-,

0

c

~

"0
c

1

~

w

.:

u

0

2

2'

rnscllon of Oxyg e n

~ Computed Critical Ignition Diameters for
n-Heptane Burning in OxygenlHelium. (refs. 3,4,8).

'"

\ - -- -- ! elm

i ,

[ \

l'

t
2

•

JS
Mole

" II"

r

E
E

1

- - 0.5 at.m
- - 0.25 al m

,

2, , ,

~

025 ol m

'.

"

\

j
"
I , , , , I , , • , ! , , ,
2~

J

, ,-j-, ... ~~:-: . :---;::.;-~

J~

,,~~

Mole fracllon of Oxygen

~

Computed Extinction Diameters
for n-Heptane Burning in Helium Diluent
(refs. 3,4,8).

O
.1TI- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -009,
I
0.08~ .. 0 .07j

E
oS

,

oS
~

Q;

<i
E

.,

tlow lNa Dtop6tl 1lZI. The
ellJOJ,lll MoOom AI. Too

5

0.06
I

0.05

-j

1

~ 0.04~

~

o.OJ~

:.:~j
0.15

0.2

0.25

O+!--~---,--~--~------~--------

o

0.3

Oxygen Mola Fraction

J

5

Normalized RadiUS

Figure 3. Test Envelope for n-Heptane Droplet Studies in Droptowera
and on Spacc-bued Platfonns in Helium Diluent (refs 3,4,8).

295

~ Predicted Stefan., Small Particle Thermophoretic (SPT),
and Large Particle Therrnophoretic (LPT) Velocity Distributions
at Quasi-Steady ConditiolUl for n-Heptane-Air (Nitrogen)
Droplet Burning (1 atm.).

8

0 .8

=

[Mod e l

--- -. -- -- ---- - -----.
2

~

2.5

"0

8

. . . .- . -.~........ --- -----ementJ
-~

0 .7

.

>="

=- i

•

~

ir.

-

I

0.6

'"

....
.....

1

~

::>

....

.- -- .- -- OHo10

0.3

._ --

VI

<n

1500

0.4

'E
"

2

- - - C7 Hi •

·u
OJ

E
C>

E--

0.2

500

VI

--- --- ---

0. 1

LLL.Oi::::L.:l....J..d:.:;--=.!::±.,J....J.:.:::L:i:.~.d.....L......L...1._L.l_LJLL.LLLJ

0.0

1+~~-~,----~,----------'
'
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.1

0

10

5

20

15
r / rp

(S e c)

25

Predicted Species Profiles for Quasi-Steady n-HeptaneAir Droplet Burning (I atm.) using the Detailed Mechanism of
Wamatz (2 1). No Droplet Heating.

8

,
<.J
OJ

'-.,.

I I I

111'1

; ,, 11 1
1
I

I ",

"I

I

I

I , 1111 1

,

, I

, '''~

--- --- Kp

1.6

Vl
N

360

- - - Te

E
E

---T.
1. 2

unsteady
4

+

quasi-steady

burning

0

30

~

Figure 5. Predicted /Experimental Sootshdl Stand-off Ratio for
n-Heptane-AU (Nitrogen) Droplet Burning (I atm.).

6

....

0.
"

C,He

0-

Titu

::

1000

--T

OJ

1.5

...

- - - H0100

VI
VI

!

---- -- O2

0.5

!::
0

-'
<.J

.

,---------------------------------~2000

340 E--

.B

burning

2
(8 a..)
<.J
OL.L....L.L..L....L.L..L...l...-L.L....L...J~...L...J--L..L.l.....L...J

o
~

.2

.4

.6

.8

ti t"

Calculated Flame Stand-<lff Ratio
for n-Heptane -AU Droplet Burning with Mechanism
ofWamatz (2 1). No Droplet Heating.

Ol

initial vaporization
qu a si-steady
burnmg

1.6

Vl

;;--E
E

360
~

340 E--"

1.2
Oo

~

OJ
....

Ol

::I

..>

«l

.B

0::

c:

- ---- - Kp
---T.

o
:;:;

ttl

I

.4

()

I

.....
III

ttl

~

/

-'

r---I

320

(8 h .)

10-'

C-

E
C)

I
3 00

/
/
,f BO

10-'

10

t l th

~ The Temporal Variation of Gasification Rates (Kp), Droplet
Swface Temperature CT,) and Droplet Cc:nter Tempenture (TC>. (a).
Conduction Limit Model. (b). InflDrte P.eat Conductivity Model CT. = Te>.

296

....

<:J

lJ

0 6
10-

«l

r

COMBUSTION EXPERIMENTS IN REDUCED GRAVITY WITH
TWO-COMPONENT MISCIBLE DROPLETS
Benjamin D. Shaw 1 and Israel Aharon 2
Mechanical, Aeronautical and Materials Engineering Department
University of California
Davis, California 95616

Introduction
The combustion of liquid fuels is a topic worthy of scientific attention on practical and fundamental grounds. Most
practical applications of liquid-fuel combustion involve the formation of spray diffusion flames. where droplets frequently
bum in groups rather than individually . The combustion is typically complex. with interactions occurring between various
physical mechanisms .
Many efforts to understand liquid sprays have focused upon studying isolated droplets. Information gained from these
studies is often not directly transferable to spray situations. However. isolated-droplet studies are useful in that they allow
certain phenomena (e.g .• extinction) to be studied under well-controlled and simplified conditions. When theory and
experiment agree for simplified situations. predictions for more complex cases (where accurate experimental data may not
exist) may be made with more confidence. The simplest droplet combustion scenario is that of an isolated droplet
undergoing spherically-symmetric combustion in an environment of infinite extent This idealization is approached only
when forced and buoyant convection are negligible. the droplet is unsupported. and all foreign objects are far-removed from
the combustion zone. Appreciable gravity levels compromise spherical symmetry by inducing buoyant convection.
In practice. liquid fuels are usually multicomponent. It is important to understand the vaporization mechanisms of
multicomponent fuels. especially the rates that fuel components with differing properties are vaporized from the liquid
phase . This is because gas-phase phenomena depend on the components that have been vaporized. wh ile liquid-phase
phenomena depend on the components remaining in the liqUid. The simplest multicomponent fuels are (arguably) binary
and miscible. Studying binary miscible fuels is useful because they exhibit phenomena which do not appear with pure fuels
but which are characteristic of multicomponent blends. for example influences of volatility differences and liquid-phase
species diffusion.3
Though small droplets are of practical concern (e.g .• < 50 ~m as found in some spray systems), it is difficu lt to performed
detailed experiments with them. This is because small droplets are difficult to deploy and ignite without Significant
perturbations. and they may be difficult to resolve photographically . Hence. most detailed investigations into singledroplet combustion have focused upon larger droplets which are easily observed. In this program. reduced-gravity
combustion behaviors of miscible binary droplets initially about I mm in diameter are studied. Gravity levels significantl y
less than 10- 3 g's are required to make buoyancy effects negligible for these size droplets.
Vaporization histories of binary miscible droplets may be significantly different than for pure fuels . When there is a
significant volatility difference between droplet components and the lower-volatility component is initially present in
small amounts. binary droplets may exhibit a two-staged combustion history where two periods of nearly d-square-Iaw
combustion (i .e .• where the square of the droplet diameter decreases linearly with time) are separated by an intermediate
period where vaporization rates are low and flame diameters decrease significantly. These behaviors are thought to be a
result of a sudden buildup of the lower-volatility component at the droplet surface [1.2]. necessitating a sudden increase in
the droplet surface temperature. While the droplet is heating. the flame contracts because more of the energy transported to
1 Assistant Professor.
2Graduate Research Assistant.
3Exceptions do exist for initially-pure fuels. For example methanol droplets may absorb water from the gas phase.

297

the liquid is used for heating rather than simply for vaporization. Asymptotic analyses of these phenomena are reported in
[2]. During the llrst period of d-square-law vaporization, most of the fuel being vaporized is the higber-volatility
component, while during the second d-square-Iaw vaporization period, if liquid-phase species diffusivities are sufficiently
small, both liquid components are vaporized at rates that are nearly proportional to their average liquid mass fractions [3].
This mode of combustion, where both liquid components are vaporized at rates that are nearly proportional to their average
liquid mass fractions, may be termed the diffusion limit. Recent experiments [4] have suggested that liquid-phase species
diffusion may be more rapid than previously thought such that liquid-phase behaviors are intermediate between the diffusion
limit and the batch distillation mode. The experiments in Ref. [4] were performed in normal earth gravity and with
convective environments, so it is possible that convection may have played a role in promoting liquid-phase transport.
For binary mixture droplets undergoing combustion. the surface concentration of the lower volatility component will
generally tend to increase with time. Because liquid species diffusion is typically slow relative to droplet surface regression
rates, chemical stratification may occur in the droplet such that the droplet interior has a higher mass fraction of highvolatility component than the droplet surface. During combustion, tbe temperature at the droplet surface will tend to
approach the boiling temperature of the liquid surface mixture. Since Lewis numbers for liquids are typically large relative
to unity, the droplet interior may be heated above temperatures required for bubble nucleation and growth. As a result, a
bubble may grow and eventually fragment a droplet (the droplet may experience a "disruption" or "microexplosion"). These
pbenomena bave been observed in normal-gravity experiments for multicomponent mixtures [1,5-7] . Disruption has also
been observed in reduced-gravity experiments on combustion of unsupported droplets initially composed only of n-decane
[8]; similar disruptions of n-decane under normal-gravity conditions appear not to have been reported in the literature. The
mechanism behind disruption of n-decane droplets in reduced gravity has not yet been clearly identified. though it has been
postulated that disruption may be related to sooting behavior [2,8].
Experiments in reduced gravity should yield insights into the efficiency of liquid-phase species diffusion, since this
diffusion may markedly influence combustion behaviors. as described above for the two-staged combustion behaviors. By
noting times for flame contraction to occur with mixtures that exhibit two-staged combustion behaviors. calculations for
effective liquid-phase species diffusivities may be made (e.g., with the asymptotic theory in [2], or with numerical models).
Finally. sooting behavior may be significantly different during the two d 2 -law periods since gas-phase compositions may
differ significantly. Differences in sooting may be observable photographically by noting behaviors of apparent flame
luminosities and soot particles large enough to be observed.

Scientific Objectives
This research focuses on the combustion of binary miscible droplets. Experiments are performed at the NASA Lewis 2.2 sec
drop tower in Cleveland. Ohio. Mixtures of n-heptane and n-hexadecane are presently being studied. providing significant
variations in component volatilities. The objectives are to gather data on the following:

(I)
(2)
(3)

Transient droplet diameters (including two-staged combustion behaviors and disruption).
Transient flame behaviors (including sudden flame contraction as discussed above. and extinction).
Transport of observable soot particles .

Obtaining these data will be useful in several respects. Knowledge of transient droplet and flame diameters will provide an
experimental base from which comparisons between theory and experiment may be made. Working with droplets composed
of high-volatility and a low-volatility components, with the latter initially present in small amounts relative to the former,
should allow the sudden-flame-contraction behaviors discussed previously to be observed. By noting times for suddenflame contraction to occur. estimates of liquid-phase species diffusivities may be made. These data will also be useful for
development and validation of detailed numerical models.

Work Performed To Date

Digital Image Processing System - A Sun workstation-based digital image processing system has been developed and
constructed for analysis of cine films from drop tower experiments. Basic concepts for this system were obtained from
Ref. (9]. where a PC-based digital image processing system is described. Software for the Sun-based system has been
developed with the assistance of Virtual Visions Software 4 .

4 Address: 408 Mountain Laurel Court, Mountain View, CA 94043.

298

Drop Tower Experiments - During the summer of 1992, experiments with n-beptane/n-bexadecane mixture droplets were
performed at the NASA Lewis Research Center 2.2 sec drop tower. An existing droplet combustion apparatus available at
NASA Lewis was used for these experiments; this apparatus is described elsewhere (10] . Experiments were attempted both
with and without a ceramic support fiber ('" 10 ~m diameter) being present. The ceramic fiber was utilized to prevent
significant droplet drift after deployment. The fiber assembly used in the present experiments was developed by D.
Dietrich 5 . Twenty-two experiments were performed, both with and without the fiber. Initial droplet compositions,
environmental compositions, and pressures were varied in the experiments. Four experiments were successful, with
droplets that had low deployment velocities (a few mmls or less). The other experiments were unsuccessful for various
reasons, the most common of which was large residual deployment velocities that caused droplets to quickly leave the
camera field of view, even when the fiber was used.
The four successful experiments all utilized the support fiber - data was not obtained for unsupported droplets. Droplets in
the successful experiments were burned in air at 1 atm, and involved using initial droplet bexadecane mass fractions of 0,
20, 40 and 60%. In the experiments, two cine cameras with orthogonal fields of view were used to simultaneously record
liquid droplet and flame behaviors. Photography of liquid droplets involved backlighting, while flames were
photographed without backlighting.
Preliminary analyses of the cine films have been performed with the workstation-based image processing system.
Further processing is needed to complete analysis of these films. The image processing system was used to measure
droplet diameter histories from the four films, as well as the flame diameter history for one film. Shown in Fig 1. are
plots of the squares of the droplet diameters (d 2 ) vs. time for the four successful experiments . Data are plotted for the time
period from spark ignition until the droplets either became too small to image or the drop package hit the bottom of the
drop tower. The percentages listed are the initial hexadecane liquid mass fractions. After decay of initial transients.
droplet diameter bistories appear to show regions where the d-square-law approximately holds . Only the experiment with
a 20% hexadecane initial mass fraction appears to clearly show a plateau in the d 2 vs . time plot, indicative of droplet
heating. Cine films of the flame behavior for this experiment show the flame to grow, contract. and then grow again
over a time period near when the plateau in the d 2 plot in Fig. 1 appears. A sequence of three pictures showing the flame
behavior over this time period is shown in Fig. 2. Times in this figure are after ignition, and show the flame prior to
contraction, after the flame bas contracted (the flame was very dim during this time), and later when it begins to grow in
size again. Squares of measured droplet and flame diameters for this experiment are shown in Fig. 3, where it is seen that
the onset of flame contraction occurs just prior to the onset of the plateau in the droplet diameter history . Flame
diameters in Fig. 3 were measured perpendicular to the fiber.
In the films, it was evident that the fiber was influencing combustion to some extent. For example, soot particles large
enough to be seen were sometimes observed to migrate to the fiber and accumulate there. The flames in Fig . 2 are
elongated along the fiber. suggesting an influence of the fiber. Shown in Fig. 4. is an image of a droplet, initially 60%
hexadecane, 0.39 sec after ignition. The observable soot "shell " is not spberical. though it does appear to be somewhat
symmetric about tbe support fiber axis . In the cine film. soot can be seen to accumulate at the fiber as time progresses .
Glowing of support fibers in the hotter portions of the flames was also observed. This is evident in Fig. 2, where the
bright, horizontal streaks in each image are actually the glowing fiber. How the radiative heat loss associated with this
glowing affects combustion has not yet been evaluated.
Cine films of combustion of a droplet composed initially of 100% n-beptane showed evidence of what appears to be a
microexplosion. A sequence of images showing the flame behavior just prior to. during, and after the microexplosion are
shown in Fig. 5. This event appears to have caused tbe droplet to bave lost an appreciable amount of mass in a short time
period, as is evident in the d 2 plot of Fig. I by the "kink" in the data that appears between about 0.3 and 0.4 sec.

Future Plans

Design and Construction of Droplet Combustion Apparatus - A droplet combustion apparatus for use in the NASA Lewis 2.2
sec drop tower is being developed and constructed at UC Davis. This apparatus is projected to be ready for use in late fall
1992. To improve experiment success rates, improvements will be incorporated. For example, it is difficult with the
apparatus presently available at NASA Lewis to accurately set the deployment needles and ignition electrodes to desired
tolerances, resulting in many failed experiments because of bad droplet deployment or ignition. The new apparatus will
incorporate positioning equipment that should allow accurate and repeatable placement of ignition electrodes and
deployment needles prior to each experiment. Efforts will also be directed at providing suitably-matched pairs of droplet
deployment needles.

5Current Address: Sverdrup Technology, Inc. , 2001 Aerospace Parkway, Brookpark, Ohio 44142.

299

The new apparatus being constructed is projected to use scanner motor technology previously applied in older versions of
the apparatus (for droplet deployment, scanner motors were used to simultaneously retract two opposed deployment
needles between which droplets were grown (10)). Preliminary tests by NASA Lewis personnel have suggested that the
use of DC motors with retraction speeds significantly higher than scanner motors may result in very small residual
droplet deployment velocities and significantly higher experiment success rates. This DC motor technology, still under
development. will be considered for use in the apparatus being built at UC Davis.

Drop Tower Experiments - The UC Davis drop apparatus will be used for more experiments with n-heptaneln-hexadecane
mixtures. Experiments will be done with different initial environmental compositions and pressures. Initial oxygen
mole fractions from about 0.1 to 0.5 and initial pressures from 0.5 to 2 atm will be used. Different inerts will be used in
the gas phase to enhance or inhibit certain phenomena. For example, He may be used to increase average gas phase
transport properties. promoting extinction and higher burning rates [11], while C02 may possibly be used to inhibit
soot formation [12] .
It may be important to inhibit soot formation in these experiments. Flame contractions and droplet disruptions have
previously been observed for n-decane droplets burning in low-gravity environments [8], as well as the n-heptane droplet
described above. These behaviors, which were unexpected for single component fuels. have been postulated to result
from sooting effects [2,8]. If this is correct. flame contractions and droplet disruptions arising from surface buildup of
the less volatile component in a binary fuel droplet may be influenced to an unknown extent by sooting, making
interpretation of experimental results difficult. Experiments will be performed to search for conditions where sooting
appears to influence combustion negligibly. Alcohol mixtures (which should tend to soot less than hydrocarbons) may
also be used. though alcohols may absorb water into the liquid phase.

Image Processing System - Films are currently processed manually with the image processing system. The image
processing system will be automated to allow a large number of frames to be rapidly processed from each film strip. In
addition. data is presently taken from films by manually selling a threshold corresponding to the perceived droplet
diameter. Edge detection algorithms will be incorporated into the image processing program. allowing more repeatable
and accurate measurement of droplet diameters.
Computational Modeling - Efforts to provide numerical data for comparison with experimental results have been initiated.
Professor H. A. Dwyer of UC Davis is the principal architect of the models presently being utilized. Briefly, the models
assume that spherical symmetry exists in the gas and liquid phases. The governing equations are cast in a fmite-volume
form. and solved numerically for transient liquid- and gas-phase variables. Variable properties in both the liquid and gas
phases are allowed . Complex chemical kinetics in the gas phase can be modeled. as well as global one-step reaction
schemes . Initial results from this model were not available at the time this paper was written. but are expected to be
available in the near future . Calculations are performed using the Sun workstation also used for image processing.
Other - To aid interpretation of experimental efforts, studies of allowable acceleration levels and durations will be
performed . Issues such as droplet oscillation amplitudes. oscillation decay times. pre-ignition vaporization. etc., will be
considered. In addition to being relevant to drop tower experiments. such studies will be germane to possible future
night experiments involving droplet combustion.
References
I.

Wang, C.H .. Liu. X.Q .. and Law. C.K .. "Combustion and Microexplosion of Freely Falling Multicomponent
Droplets." Combustion and Flame. 56: pp.175-197 (1984).

2.

Shaw, B.D. , and Williams. F.A .• "Theory of Influence of a Low-Volatility, Soluble lmpurity on Spherically Symmetric
Combustion of Fuel Droplets ." International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 33 : pp. 301-317 (1990).

3.

Shaw. B .D. , "Studies of Influences of Liquid-Phase Species Diffusion on Spherically Symmetric Combustion of
Miscible Binary Droplets." Combustion and Flame, 81: pp. 277-288 (1990) .

4.

Randolph, A.L., Makino, A .• and Law. C.K .• "Liquid-Phase Diffusional Resistance in Multicomponent Droplet
Gasification ," Twenty-First SymDQsium (International) on Combustion. pp. 601-608 (1988).

5.

Lasheras, l.C .• Fernandez-Pello. A.C .• and Dryer, F.L., "Experimental Observations on the Disruptive Combustion of
Free Droplets of Multicomponent Fuels," Combustion Science and Technology. 22. pp. 195-209 (1980).

6.

Yap, L.T .. Kennedy, I.M .. and Dryer, F.L., "Disruptive and Micro-Explosive Combustion of Free Droplets in Highly
Convective Environments, " Combustion Science and Technology, 41, pp. 291-313 (1984).

300

7.

Niioka. T .• and Sa1o. J .• "Combustion and Microexplosion Bebavior of Miscible Fuel Droplets Under Higb Pressure:
Twenty-first Symposium <International) on Combustion pp. 625-631 (1988).

8.

Sbaw. B.D .. Dryer. F.L. Williams. F.A .• and Haggard. I.D .• "Sooting and Disruption in Spberically-Symmclrical
Combustion of Decane Droplets in Air: Acta Astronaytjca. 17: pp. 1195-1202 (1988).

9.

Cboi. M. Y. and Dryer. F. L.. "A Digital Image Processing Technique for Droplet Burning Data." Mecbanical and
Aerospace Engineering Report #1875. Princeton University (1989).

10. Haggard. J. B. and KropP. J. L.. "Development of a Dropiet Combustion Experiment for Low-Gravity OPeration:
paper AIAA-87-0576 presented at the AIAA Twenty-fifth Aerospace Sciences Meeting.
11. Cbo. S. Y .• Cboi. M. Y .. and Dryer. F. L.. "Extinction of a Free Methanol Droplet in Microgravity: Twenty-Third
Symposium <lnternationall on Combustion. pp. 1611-1617 (1990).
12. Kadota. T .. Hiroyasu. H .• and Farazandebmer. A .• "Soot Formation by Combustion of a Fuel Droplet in Higb Pressure
Gaseous Environments." Combustion and Flame 29. pp.67-75 (1977).

2.0 .---------O-----O-~-o-h-e-x-a-d-ec-an-e-,
1.5

--0---A-- '
_ f:s......
.•.•
.-t:z ......

20 % hexadecane
40 % hexadecane
60 % hexadecane

u·.t:.

"'t:..

1.0

0.5

0.0 +-----.,----r---~c::::::.{~-'6---'T"""-----i
1.2
0.0
0.2
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.6

Time from Ignition Spark (sec)
Figure I.--Plots of squares of measured droplet diameters vs . time.

0.794 sec

0.860 sec

0.990 sec

Figure 2.--Sequence of images sbowing flame contraction and growth for a droplet composed initially of 20% n-bexadecane
and 80% n-beptane. Tunes are after the ignition spark. Visible flame diameters (measured perpendicular to the fiber) for
this droplet are plotted in Fig. 3.

See Color Plate G2A
301

........

N

<

E

...

CI.)

'is 1.5

E
<:3

Q3

30 N
S

poo o O

E

'-'

0

........

2.0
00.0

§

Iy

...

0

"0

~
:::l

;)

:J

20

1.0

0.

a

...

'-'

'b

0.5

20% hexadecane
80% heptane

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

ti
~

a
0

9

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

~

a
10 [1:

cr 0.0
0
CI)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 l.0 1.2
Time After Ignition Spark (sec)

.

....~

o.

SIt::; ·...:, ..

'0

.:J

~
:::l

co
CI)

Figure 4.-Image of a droplet (initially 60%
n-hexadecane and 40% n-heptane) showing
the support fiber and the soot "shell" .
The droplet diameter is about 1.07 rom.

Figure 3.--Plots of squares of droplet and flame
d iameters for a droplet composed initially of
20% n-hexadecane and 80% n-heptane.

0.324 sec

•
' .~

1)

0.342 sec

0 .333 sec

f ig ure 5.· -Seyuence 01 images showi ng the flam e be havior j ust prior to. during and after what appears to be disruption of a
d rople t initiall y co mposed o nl y of n· heptane. Times are after the ignition spark. For a scale re ference. the visib le
name di ameter at 0.3 24 sec IS abo ut 4.7 mm (measured perpend icular to the fiber ).

See

302

Color Plate G2b

STATUS OF THE CNRS-LCSR PROGRAM ON HIGH PRESSURE DROPLET
VAPORIZATION AND BURNING
Christian Chauveau and Iskender Gbkalp
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Laboratoire de Combustion et Systemes Reactifs
45071 Orleans cedex 2, France

Introduction
Depending on the surrounding flow and thennodynamic conditions. a single droplet may experience several
gasification regunes. ranging from the envelope flame regime to pure nporization. In practical situations. such
as rocket propulsion or diesel combustion. the size distribution of droplets is. at best. bimodal. so that the
possibility exists for the simultaneous presence of various regimes. For example. very small droplets are
transported by the gas phase with zero relative velocity. This picture validates then the spherical symmetry
hypothesis applied to the droplet and to the diffusion flame enveloping it. On the other hand. for larger
droplets. a relatiye "elocity exists due to drag forces. The most important influence of forced convection on
droplet burning is the possibility to extinguish globally the em'elope flame. or to establish a flame stabilized in
the wake region. The burning rates of these regimes diifer strongly. The characteristic time of droplet
gasification is 3lso influenced by the surrounding pressure and temperature. A parametric im'est igation of
single droplet burrung regimes IS then helpful in providing the necessary physical ideas for sub-grid models
used in spray combusuon nwnerical prediction codes.
The CNRS-LCSR experimental program on droplet vaporizauon and burning deals "ith these vanous regimes:
stagnant and convective monocomponent droplet burning (refs. I and 2): convective mono and bicomponent
droplet vaporization lrefs. 3 and 4); high temperature convective mono and bicomponent droplet ,'aporization
(ref. 5): burning regimes of hydrazine and hydroxyl-amrnoniwn-nitrate based monopropellant droplets and the
vaporization regimes of liquid oXygen droplets. Studies on interacting droplets and on liquid aluminium
droplets wiII start In the near future. The influence of high pressure is a common feature of all these studies.
This paper summarizes the status of the CNRS-LCSR program on the effects of high pressure on
monocomponent single droplet burning and vaporization. and some recent results obtained under normal and
reduced gra,;~' conditions "'ith suspended droplets are presented. In the work described here. parabolic flights
of an aircraft is used to create a reduced gravity environment of the order of 10-2 g.

Description of the e;q?erimental techniques
The High Pressure Droplet Burning Facility

Droplet burning experiments under stagnant and variable pressure conditions are perfonned in a specially
designed facili~' : High Pressure Droplet Burning Facility (HP-DBF). The HP-DBF is designed to Investigate

303

the gasification regimes of suspended or free-floating droplets under variable pressure conditions. up to 12
MPa. Low pressure droplet burning experiments can also be realized (refs. 6. 7 and 8) . HP-DBF can be used
during the parabolic flights of an aircraft. This apparatus is articulated around a cylindrical combustion
chamber of 11 htres capacity. made of an aluminium alloy (AU4G). and mounted on a support structure with a
control panel. Two circular flanges are mounted on the two sidewalls of the octogonally shaped external faces
of the chamber. Ten identical openings are positioned on the chamber: two openings on the sidewalls to
support the droplet injection and ignition systems. and eight along the octagonal perimeter. Two injection
needles are positioned face to face and are connected to an electrical pump, allowing the injection of a fuel
amount of 0.5 microliters/min. A droplet is formed between the two retractable injectors. A tiltable
(d = 0 .2 mm) quartz fibre. mounted on the upper chamber wall. cart be positioned between the two needles to
hold the droplet in the case of suspended droplet experiments. Depending on the droplet burning experiment
type. various ignition systems are used. During normal pressure e:\-periments. the droplet is ignited by one pair
of electrodes mounted around one injection needle. The ignition spark is produced by a high tension (10 kV)
solenoid under 24 V DC. For high pressure droplet burning e:o.-periments. art improved version of the injection
system and a heated coil for ignition are used. The sequence of injection and ignition operations is computer
controlled

Diagnoslics
The pnnciple diagnosuc systems we are using are based on the visualization of the droplet vaporization or
burning phenomena. For droplet burning experiments. the recording equipment is composed of two systems. A
high speed ,ideo camera. Kodak-Ektapro 1000, which can record up to 1000 full frames per second. allows
detailed analysis of droplet burning. The Ektapro 1000 Motion Analyzer's live. real-time viewing makes
possible to follow the in\,esugated phenomena frame per frame. A standard "ideo camera. Sony 8 rom PAL is
used to record the droplet and the flame in true colours. but only at 25 frames per second. A second camera has
been added to the Kodak-Ektapro 1000 system. in order to be able to observe simultaneously the droplet artd
the flame "ith respecu\'e appropriate magnification rates. The digitized images from the Ektapro system are
transferrcd to a microcomputer where the image analyses are performed. Details of the image analysis are fully
documented in ref. 6.
For droplet \'aporization e:o.-periments a different imaging system IS used. It is composed of a camera. a data
acquisition Interfacc. ::I Bme base corrector. a micro-computer. and a TV monitor. The camera is
monochromatic and has 256 grey levels and a CCD matnx of 512 x 512 pixels. It is equipped with an
dectromc shutter ,,;th a IDa."-1mum rate of 11l0000. The camera OptICS prO\ides a maximum magnification rate
of 80 . The image di gitizauon is done through of a MA TROX PIP 102.+ interface (\"Ideo memory I Mo ) wltich
allows the digilization oj an image of 102.+ x 1024 or four images of 512 x 512 . A digital time corrector ~ith
I ms resolution IS added. TI1e digitizalion rate is 50 Hz. Each pixel is coded on 8 bits. that is 256 levels of
grey. The nucrocomputer has a I.+86DX 33 MHz processor. a hard disk of 200 Mo. -+ Mo of memory and a
S-VGA screen.
Suspended droplets are backlighted: this provides the necessary contrast for direct threshold definition. The
time to extract the droplet contour is less then 1150 s to allow the maximum image acquisition rate (50 Hz).
The droplet contour deterrrunation is based on dichotomic point research methodology. To optimize the speed
of frame grabbing and the size of the image data. we have chosen to take only eighty points along the contour.
These data are simultaneously memory saved and displayed on the screen. At the ena of the acquisition (750
frames) the complete data sets are trartsferred to the hard disk. The data analysis consists in calculating the
surface area from the comour points artd to obtain the droplet equivalent diameter. The droplet diameter and
its corresponding time are saveQ. in a synthesized file . The major advantage of the method is its well defined
time resolution. characterized by the impressive number of pictures taken into account during a droplet
lifetime.

304

-

- -

-- - -

- -

- -

- -

- - - ----

Results and discussion
High pressure low temperature vaporizatIOn experiments
Preliminary e~:periments have been conducted under normal gravity conditions to determine the influence of
ambient pressure on the vaporization of n-heptane and methanol droplets in air at 300 K (or Tr = Trrc = 0.56
and 0.59 respectively). The maxImum reduced pressure Pr = PlPc was 3.6 for heptane and I. 2 for methanol.
Droplet initial diameters were between I mm and 1.5 mm. The variation mth time of (dldo) 2 for n-heptane
droplets is shown on Fig. I. These curves are used to determine an average vaporization constant. Kav. The
variation of Kav with PlPc is shonn on Fig. 2. Kav decreases strongly for PlPc < I and shows a weakly
increasing behaviour for PlPc > I. The decrease of Kav for PlPc < 1 can be explained by the increased ambient
gas density which delays the build up of the fuel vapour concentration profile near the droplet surface and its
further diffusion into the ambience. The decrease of Kav in the subcritical pressure regime IS confirmed by
methanol droplet vaporization e~:periments (Fig. 2). They also show another phenomenon for moderate
pressures. The data for pure methanol for P = 0.1 MPa indicates a sequenual vaporization behaviour (Fig 3).
This behaviour is no more observed for approximately PlPc > 0 .3. The sequential vaporization behaviour of
methanol droplets for moderate pressures is to be compared with the observations of refs. 9 and 10. The curves
of d 2(t) are also used to detemune the mstantaneous vaporization rates (Figs. 4a and 4b). For heptane droplets.
the largest vanaUon IS observed for the atmospheric pressure case. For Increasing pressures. K(t) increases
during the last quarter of the vaponzation lifetime. which may well be an artefact of the Influence of the
suspensIOn fibre. Except the moderate pressure experiments. K(t) for methanol droplets shows the sante
behavIOur. A quasl-steadv state process can thus be assumed to charactenze high pressure vaponzation of
n-heptane and methanol droplets In room temperarure air.

High pressure droplet burnIng experIments
High pressure bunung experiments have been conducted with n-heptane and methanol droplets. The
experiments with n-heptane droplets were conducted under reduced graVIty conditions only up to a maximum
pressure of 0.65 MPa. With increaSIng pressure. they show (ref. 10) a gradual increase of the a\'erage burning
rate and an increasmg non-stationary behavIOur of the instantaneous bunung rate. n-heptane burnmg droplet
expenments have been continued for tugher pressures under normal gravIty. Contrary to the results of ref. 11.
the vamshmg surfacc tcnslOn prcvented to mcrC3se the prcssurc 3bove I 8 \1P3. Thc Incrc3scd soot formation
:llso prcvcnted the dctemunatlon oi the Instantaneous droplet dlameter. An average burrung rate IS then
dctermmcd by assummg thc d 1 13\\ and by uSing the duration of the flame lummoslty as the burnout time. The
results are presented on Fig. 5 \\lth error estlmate margms. The reduced gra\l~' results are clc3fly lower than
the corresponding normal gra\'l~' results. The vanauon WIth pressure of the average burrung rate In the
subcntical regime C3n be rcpresented \\lth a power law of the form pOJ6

Burning experiments of considerably less sooting methanol droplets have been conducted under reduced
gravity conditions to be able to detect the instantaneous droplet diameter: These expenments have been
conducted between normal atmosphenc pressure and a maximum reduced pressure of Pr = 063 . Two pIctures
of a burning suspended methanol droplet with do = 1.5 mm and for Pr = 0.63 are shown on Plate L Figure 6
presents the curves of d2 (t) for two pressures. The sequential gasification beha\10ur is not observed even for the
lowest pressure range (see also ref. 12). As shown on Fig. 7, the average burning rate increases with pressure.
Three methods have been compared on this figure : the method based on the d 2 law and the droplet lifetime: the
method based on the average slope of the d 2(t) curve: and that based on the average value of K(t) . As a first
approximation. and for the pressure range investigated here. the three methods give comparable values and a
quasi-linear mcrease of the average burning rate with pressure. Figure 8 shows the instantaneous burning rates
for high pressure methanol droplet burning experiments. The curve for the highest pressure. P = 5 rviPa. is
distinguishable from the others by its accentuated non-stationary behaviour.

305
----_. ----_. -_.

Furnre work
The investigation of high pressure effects \\ill be the main focus of the future LCSR work on droplet
ganfication regimes. The supercritical regime "ill be approached with the help of a new "ersion of the
HP-DBF which is under construction: it will allow to increase the temperature as well as the pressure of the
ambient medium. This appararus will be used to investigate the vaporization and burning of mono and
muiticomponent fuel droplets in high pressure and high temperature conditions and also to compare normal
grcnity and reduced gravity experiments to infer natural convection effects. An electrodynamic balance is
under development and will be added to the appararus. It will allow to conduct supercritical vaporization
expenments under normal gravity conditions. The parabolic flights of the Caravelle aircraft "ill be continued
to be used for suspended droplet experiments. A new high pressure droplet burning module mil be developed
to be used during sounding rocket experiments In collaboration with ESA/ESTEC and MBB-ERNO. A major
pwpose of the following years is the investigauon of high pressure vaporization of liquid o:\;ygen droplets. A
collaboration is established with the University of Marseille and ONERA to develop the numerical modelling
pan of this task.

Acknowledgments
The droplet vaporization and burrung studies program of the CNRS-LCSR is supponed by the Microgravity
Office of the European Space Agency. the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. the Societe Europeenne de
Propulsion. the Commission of the European Communities. the Joint Research Programme of the European
Car \1anufacturers. the French Army Research Office. and ONERA.

References

1. Gakalp. l.. Chauveau. C. Richard. I.R .. Kramer. M. and Leuckel. W.. Twenty-Second S~'mposium
(International) on Combustion. The Combusuon Institute. Pittsburgh, 1988 pp. 2027-2035 .
2. Chauveau. C. and Gbkalp. I.. Proceedings of 7th. European Symposium on Materials Sciences and Fluid
Ph~' sics in Microgravity. ESA-SP-295 . 1990. pp. ~6 7-P2 .
~ Gokalp. I. . Chau\'eau. c.. Simon. 0 and Chesneau. X .. Combustion and Flame. \ 01 Xl) . I tJY 2. pp. 286-

298
Goka/p. I.. Chauveau. C . Ramos-Arrovo. :.; ..l. .. Berrekam. H. and Chcsneau. x.. Proceedin2s of the 5th
IL\SS Americas. May 18-20. /992. San Ramon . Ca.
5. Ramos-Arroyo. NA .. Berrekam. H.. Chauveau. C. and Gbkalp. l.. Paper to be presented at the Fall Meeting
of tbe Western States Section of the Combustion Institute. October 12-13. 1992. Berkeley. Ca.
6. Chauveau. c.. Vaporisation et Combusuon des Gounes Isolees de n-Heptane. Etude en Microgravite et
Influence de la Convection Forcee. PhD. Thesis. Universite d'Orleans. 1990
7. Chauveau. C and Gbkalp. I., Ann. Chim. Fr .. vol. 17.1992. pp. 27~~.
8. Chesneau. X .. Chauveau. C and Gbkalp. 1. Proceedings of the First European Symposium on Fluids in
Space. ESA SP-353. 1992. pp. -l07 ~18 .
9. Law. CK.. Xiong. T.Y. and Wang, c.H.. Int. J . Heat Mass Transfer. vol. 30, no. 7. 1987. p. l~35 .
10. Cho. S.Y.. Choi. M .Y. and Dryer. F.L.. Twenty-Third Symposium on Combustion. The Combustion
Institute. 1990. pp. 1611-1617.
11. Sato. 1.. Tsue. M .. Niwa. M . and Kono. M.. Combustion and Flame. vol. 82. 1990. pp. I ~2-150 .
12. Yang, I.C. Jackson. G.S. and Avedisian. C T. . Twenty-Third Symposium on Combustion. The
Combustion Institute. 1990. pp. 16 19-1625.

~

306

12:r-------------------------------------___

,0

08

0 0.1
a 1.0
+ 2.0
.4.0
.6.0
. 8.0
09.0

MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa

Vaponsallon
T =300 K AIR

06

• n-Heptane
+ Methanol

0

""
i!
O.

02

oo~o--------~------~~------~------~

oo~o--------~~------~~------~~------~~

PIPe

Fig. 2 : Evolution oiKlKo with PIPe for n-Heptane and
Methanol droplets.

Fig. I : ln11uence of the ambient pressure on the
vaporization ot n-Heptane droplets.

·2~--------------------------~~--I

I
./

.,
MethanOl

'"
~

oPsO.t MPa
a P . 3.0 MP a
+ P s 7.0 MPa

06

'

-

,! - .'

- - 0. t MPa--- 5 MPa
t MPa. - · - 6 MPa
2 MPa - - 7 MPa
. . . 3 MPa ···· B MPa
. , - " - 4 MPa - · ·- 10 MPa

/-' : '
"J : .' _'

11:. '

~

04

02

..
clg.:i

: ~L
.-----: 2-----~ 4----~'~---~
~
;L
:6
:~a---~~.~~

· ~o

-:JO
Tim.

INC)

blllue:nee: ot" the :unbienl pressure on the:
\'aponzauon ot" Methanol droplets.

F!s. 4a : Instantaneous \'aponzauon rat.:s lor n- Hc:p tane
droplets.

J .J -

2'

•

1 - 0.1 MP a t M Pa - .2 MPa - . , . 3M Pa ··· ·
4 M Pa - .. -

5MPa
6 MPa
7 MPa
8MPa
9

2.~

Data

-

~.J

-

.'

o

.z

"

"

Exp. Data IG lobal)
~hcroIT.Vlty

.......

Z.8 -

\

,2

_ _ Mia Err .
;J • • • •
6

,
, 6

.

J .O -

-......:....:.. Exp . Oat. (Avera!e )
__ _ Max Err.

Z. O

'" 1.6

08

; '
-

1.5 -

o.

1.3 10 -

:0

::.0

: 2S

0 50

075

0 .6

1 00

6

:0

14

P {Al m. )

: 1 tmax

Fi!1. 5 Influence of the ambient pressure on the

Fig. 4b : Instantaneous \'aponzation rates tor Methanol
droplets.

combusuon of n-He~tane droplets

307

16

--------- - ------------------

-

l
l

I

(b) = 12-1-1
1 2~~

(a) / = 520 ill S
I

111 5

2
Platc I PiCllIl es ofa ullflling slIspcndcd Methallol drople/ : P = 5 MPa, g= 10-2 gil' dll = 1. 5 111111
Plate
Pietili CS of a Imrillng silspended Methanoi dropl et:
g""
d,,= 1.5 mill
V>

o

\0

2 0 , - - - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _- - ,

'?5, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - ,
5, --------------------------------------------,
r

.--

.,
~

-0
CD

n
CD

~
CD ~
8
0.. ~
a.~
::J
lO
-0

•

\

08
06

M ell.anol

'"

1

Tolailime melhod
Tolail ime
..... - Avelage KIll melhod
A verage

Meillano,
oP : OIMf'a
o P = 0 I M Pa
o P ~ 3 OM Pa
0 f' = 3 0 MPa

-

•

~
'"
~
E

g
E

;;

;,
;;
//

I '

,
J''';' '"
r '"

. '

CD

\LI

o.

"

.., "

-' "

16

0.2 MPa 2.5 MPa
- - 10 MPa _ .- 3 0 MPa
- - 1.5 MPa
.. 3 5 MPa
2 0 MPa _ . - 5 0 MPa

~~
~'

12

~
~

oe

.- '

1/ /
1/
11"-

02 -

1
ool -'1_ _ = _- - .L
0 0 00
0 0 - - -.1 5
0.,.1
05
10

"

.;
."

. ,,/
,,;d
; /"
"
. ;"
'/"
0
,,/0

-. -

" '.

.... ....

V

.,

Q)
OJ

lO
'"

- Slope melhod

7 ,, ~o- ? II
~

08

~

l

_ _ -L
_ .._-L-. _I _ _ .
__

15

20

2S
25

30

Time (SIC)
lime (sec)

0'
0'

o

"

/(

Melhano l
Melha no

.1
1
-~--*---cJ
2
3

- - -.
------ ~

04

°8~0---~
0~2~-~0~4
~-~0~6 --~0~ ·--~
e
,0

P(MP.,
PI MP.,

"Imax

Fig 7 : EYolution of the aver(lgc burning f(llc with the
Fig.
Evolution
m'crage
rate
ambicnt prcssurc. for Methanol droplcls, in
alllbient pressure.
Methanoi droplets.
III icrogr;1\' iI)' .
fII ierogr:l\' t)'.

Fig. 8 : Instant(lncous burning ralc for high prcssurc
Instanta neous
rate
hi gh pressure
methanol droplet
experiments.
mcthanol droplct burning cxperiments.

OJ
Q)

::J Fig. 6 : Eyolulion of Cd/do)2 wilh lime for Mcthanol
:J
E"oiution (d/do)2 with time
Meth anoi
A
droplct burning in micrograyity_
droplet bllrning microgra,·ity.

HIGH-PRESSURE DROPLET COMBUSTION STUDIES
M. Mikami and M. Kana
Department of Aeronautics, University of Tokyo
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 11 3, Japan
J. Sato
Research Institute
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co., ltd.
Toyosu, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135 Japan
D.L. Dietrich
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135
and

FA Williams
Center for Energy and Combustion Research
Department of Applied Mechanics and Engineering SCiences 0310
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093

Introduction
This is a joint research program, pursued by investigators at the University of Tokyo,
UCSD, and NASA Lewis Research Center. The focus is on high-pressure combustion of
miscible binary fuel droplets. It involves construction of an experimental apparatus in
Tokyo, mating of the apparatus t o a NASA-Lewis 2.2-second drop-tower frame in San
Diego, and performing experiments in the 2.2-second tower in Cleveland, with experimental
results analyzed jointly by the Tokyo, UCSD, and NASA investigators. The project was
initiated in December, 1990 and has now involved three periods of drop-tower testing by
Mika.mi at Lewis.
The research accomplished thus far concerns the combustion of individual fiber-supported
droplets of mixtures of n-heptane and n-hexadecane, initially about 1 mm in diameter, under free-fall microgravity conditions. Ambient pressures ranged up to 3.0 MPa, extending
above the critical pressures of both pure fuels, in room-temperature nitrogen-oxygen atmospheres having oxygen mole fractions X of 0.12 and 0.13. The general objective is to study
near-critical and super-critical combustion of these droplets and to see whether three-stage
burning, observed at normal gravity, persists at high pressures in microgravity. Results
of these investigations will be summarized here; a more complete account soon will be
published (ref. 1).
Experimental Apparatus and Procedure
Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus. The pressure chamber
has four orthogonal windows that give two views of the combustion process, a backlit view
from which the droplet size as a function of time is obtained and a second view which shows

Preceding Page Blank
311

the flame surrounding the droplet. During each test, both of these views were recorded
by 16 mm cine cameras. Microgravity conditions were attained by dropping the pressure
chamber and associated experimental equipment in a drop tower at NASA Lewis Research
Center that provides 2.2 seconds of microgravity (",10- 5 normal).
Before release of the experimental package, a fuel droplet was formed at the end of a
0.125 mm silica fiber from a high-pressure syringe driven by a stepping motor. Following
release, immediately upon entry into microgravity the droplet was ignited. The ignition
source was a hot wire (aluminum alloy, 0.2 mm diameter) formed into a 2 rom diameter
loop that surrounds the droplet. The hot wire was rapidly removed after ignition, leaving
approximately 2 sec of the 2.2 sec to observe combustion. All processes, including droplet
dispensing and ignition, were controlled by a microcomputer.
The initial droplet size was approximately 1 mm in diameter.l This droplet diameter
is nearly an order of magnitude larger than that of the suspending fiber, while also being
small enough that complete burning could be observed in the available microgravity time.
The ambient gas was a nitrogen-oxygen mixture with oxygen mole fractions, X, being 0.12,
except for a small number of tests at X = 0.13. These reduced oxygen concentrations
were employed to aid in visualizing the droplet from the backlit view at high pressure.
All experiments were performed with the ambient gas and the droplet initially at room
temperature.
The binary fuel droplet was composed of n-heptane and n-hexadecane with mass fractions of hexadecane, Y, ranging from 0 (pure heptane) to 1.0 (pure hexadecane). The
subject fuels have critical temperatures and pressures of 540 K, 2.74 MPa and 722K, 1.53
MPa for heptane and hexadecane respectively. The pressure in the data reported here varied
from 0.4 to 3.0 MPa.
General Combustion Behavior
Figure 2 shows variations of the square of the droplet diameter d with time t at different
pressures, both normalized according to theory by dividing by the square of the initial
droplet diameter do. For fuel mixtures, after the initial transition period and the first
stage of linear behavior, another transition period exists (the second stage), after which the
square of the droplet diameter again decreases with time almost linearly (the third stage),
as seen in Figure 2. The cause of such three-stage burning is as follows: In the first straight
segment, the high-volatility fuel, heptane, vaporizes preferentially from the droplet surface
since the droplet temperature is relatively low. Since liquid-phase diffusion is slow relative
to droplet surface regression, the hexadecane mass fraction gradually increases in the surface
region. When the surface concentration of hexadecane reduces that of heptane sufficiently,
the vaporization rate decreases and the flame approaches the droplet (the second transition
period). After the droplet is heated by the flame enough to allow sufficient hexadecane
to vaporize, hexadecane and heptane vaporize vigorously together, in the second straight
segment. Figure 3, which shows both normalized droplet diameter and flame diameter as
functions oftime, illustrates how flame contraction follows the onset of the transition period;
this delay is reduced at larger X.
lWhen the droplet is suspended from the fiber, it is not spherical in sha.pe, but is don gated along the
fiber due to surface tension. The equivalent spherical droplet diameter is computed a.s the cubic root of the
product of the major diameter (along the fiber) with the square of the minor diameter (perpendicular to the
fiber).

312

As seen in Figure 2, this staged type of burning still exists at the supercritical ambient
pressure of 3 MPa. The concentration Y=O.ll in Fig. 2 lies outside the boundary of staged
burning reported earlier by Niioka and Sato. The phenomenon may have been present but
not observable in the normal-gravity experiments because the duration of the second stage
is shortened by the increased rate of heat transfer produced by natural convection, or the
gas-velocity and surface-tension variations under natural convection may have promoted
internal liquid mixing and thereby narrowed the region of staged burning. Stage burning
occurred for all mixtures tested other than pure fuels in the present study.
Homogeneous nucleation is not observed in this experiment. This result is expected
because the ambient gas is diluted with nitrogen, reducing the droplet surface temperature,
so that the local droplet temperature has less of a tendency to exceed the limit of superheat.
Droplet Lifetime
Figure 4 shows the dependence of the normalized droplet lifetime 2 , t/, at different ambient
pressures on the initial hexadecane mass fraction.
This figure shows that the droplet lifetime reaches a maximum at an intermediate hexadecane mass fraction, at all but the highest pressure. For fixed initial hexadecane mass
fraction, the droplet lifetime decreases with increasing ambient pressure, except for pure
hexadecane. For hexadecane, the droplet lifetime exhibits a minimum value at 2.5 MPa
rather than the critical pressure of 1.5 MPa, and the burning-rate constant exhibits a maximum at 2.5 MPa, as described later. Earlier results indicated that in air the burning-rate
constant achieves its maximum at the critical pressure. Studies of fuel-droplet evaporation,
however, have reported that the evaporation constant reaches its maximum at an ambient pressure above the critical pressure and at higher ambient pressures when the ambient
temperatures are lower. Therefore, the occurrence of the minimum droplet lifetime and the
maximum burning-rate constant above the critical pressure, rather than near the critical
pressure, may be caused by delayed attainment of liquid criticality, associated with the
lower temperatures produced by dilution of air in the present experiments. It is noteworthy
that minima are not seen for heptane or any of the mixtures. Most of their histories seem
dominated by heptane, whose critical pressure is significantly higher; the minima could
develop at higher pressures for these droplets.
As shown by Figure 2, the square of the droplet diameter decreases almost linearly with
time in the first and third stages. Figure 5 shows the burning-rate constant in the first
stage, K 1, and in the third stage, K 3, both here defined from the maximum slope in each
segment. While Kl decreases sharply with increasing initial hexadecane mass fraction at
fixed ambient pressure, K3 increases somewhat. Both increase with increasing pressure,
except for pure hexadecane, which exhibits a maximum value at 2.5 MPa, as described
above.
Since the first straight segment occupies most of the droplet lifetime for small Y, K 1,
which decreases with increasing Y, has a major influence under these conditions. On the
other hand, for large Y, since the second straight segment occupies most of the droplet
lifetime, K 3, which increases with increasing Y, is dominant.
The burning-rate constant KI may be approximated as
Kl = [8>.f(pcp))ln(1

+ B)

(1)

lThe droplet lifetime is defined as the time from the initial appea.rance of a luminoua flame until the
droplet disappears.

313

- - - -- - - - - - - --

where the transfer number B is
B = [YC7+

+ YO,OO

lIC7 WC7/( lIOWO»)/(1- YC7+)

(2)

on the assumption that, in the first straight segment, the droplet surface temperature is
nearly equal to t he boiling point of heptane, and hexadecane vaporization is negligible for
small hexadecane mass fraction. Here, YCH is heptane mass fraction in the gas phase at
the gas-liquid interface. The heptane mole fraction in the gas phase X C7+ is written as

XC7+ = o:XC7_ = 0:(1 - XC16-)

(3)

by Raoult's law and the Clausius-Clapeyron relation, where 0: < 1,and XC1- and XC16are heptane and hexadecane mole fractions in the liquid phase at the phase interface. Here
Yi are related to Xi as
(4)
From these relations, dKI/dYC16_ < 0 can be shown, which is consistent with the decrease
in Kl with increasing initial hexadecane mass fraction.
Similar reasoning could rationalize the K 3 dependence only if heptane vaporization
were negligible in the third st age. It seems more likely that, with decreasing Y, the reduced
duration of the third stage delays attainment of its maximum K 3.
Onset of the Second Transition Period
Figure 6 shows data for t he ratio of the critical volume, V e , defined as the volume of the
droplet at the onset of the second transition period, to V o , the initial droplet volume. These
data also may be interpreted approximately as the volume at the onset of flame contraction,
which follows the onset of the transition period as seen Figure 3. Results at an ambient
oxygen mole fraction of 0.13 are also shown in Figure 6. The results indicate that the critical
volume increases with the initial hexadecane mass fraction and is almost independent of
ambient pressure and oxygen content.
Two types of curves are shown in Figure 6 for the critical volumes at 1 MPa generated
with different assumptions. The dotted curve is

(5)
on the assumption that the liquid-phase diffusion is infinitely rapid and hexadecane does
not vaporize until the droplet has exhausted all heptane. Here po is the density of the
fuel mixture at room temperature, and p the density of hexadecane at the boiling point of
heptane. The broken curves are

Vc/Vo = [Y/{Y + 3€(1- Y)}](Po/p),

(6)

which is an equation of Shaw based on the assumption that the liquid-phase diffusion
coefficient D is sufficiently small relative to the burning-rate constant K such that ( =
8D / K < < 1 can be treated as a small parameter, and hexadecane vaporization is negligible.
If ( is estimated with the assumptio"n that D is the liquid-phase diffusion coefficient of
heptane in hexadecane at the boiling point of heptane, and K is the burning-rate constant
of heptane, then at 1 MPa, ( is about 0.05. The experimental. results lie between this result
and the infinite-diffusivity result but fall closer to this result at the larger values of Y and
closer to the infinite-diffusivity curve at smaller Y. Reasons for this behavior are discussed
fully in ref. 1.

314

Conclusions
The main conclusions can be listed: Staged burning still exists above the critical pressures
of heptane and hexadecane. Heptane is dominant in gasification in the first stage and
hexadecane in the third even at high pressure. Droplet lifetimes increase with the initial
hexadecane mass fraction and reach a maximum value at a mass fraction of about 0.3 for
pressures below 2.5 MPa in sufficiently diluted atmospheres. The maximum burning-rate
constant in the first stage decreases with the initial hexadecane mass fraction but that in
the third stage increases. The droplet volume at the onset of the second transition period
is almost independent of the ambient pressure. Although it can be predicted qualitatively
from liquid-phase diffusion-controlled theory, quantitative predictions are uncertain because
of variations in burning-rate constants and in liquid-phase diffusion coefficients.
Future Plans

In view of the results described above, it would be of interest to test behaviors of these
mixtures at higher pressures and at different oxygen-nitrogen ratios, particularly at h.igher
oxygen content, such as in normal ah. However, experimental difficulties in observi ng the
droplets cause the success of such investigations to be uncertain. Other plans under consideration involve studying free droplets, testing binary alcohol mixtures at these elevated
pressures (but probably not su per-cri ti cal because of their higher cri tical pressures), and investigating droplet arrays to obtain information relevant to high-pressure spray combustion.
In any event, this successful international cooperation appears to deserve to continue.
References
1. Mikami, M., Kono, M., Sato, J., Dietrich, D.L., and Williams, F.A., "Combustion of
Miscible Binary-Fuel Droplets at High Pressure under Microgravity," Combustion Science
and Technology, to appear, 1992.
I

I

I
" ... 0. 11
:\=U.11

Wire culler

-

Pi:mo wire

O.R -

o

1'= 1.0 "11':1
I\. 1'=2.0 '.II'a

o

O.fi -

1'=3.0t.1~

-

-

0.·1 -

0.2 -

L._

16 nlln cine

I lot-wire
C.-Ullcr.l
_________
i?_n_ilo~r______ ______~

Oral; shielcJ

Figure 1. Sclx:nw.ic diA;Tllm of lhe o:pcrimcnlal nppnrntus.

315

0.'1

0.11

1.2

1.6

lId 02 sccbnllll
Fig"'" 2. TL'Inroml \"rilltilm liT the 1IIJI1ll1'C of the ol'ol'lo:L
tli:ullcLcr, d, wilh lime al c1i!TcrellL ambienl l'mISIm:s.

2.5 ,---r--""'y-"--,r----r---

Y=0.22
P=O.~l

X=O.12

MPa

X=O.13

•

1.0

.,0

2.0

• • • • ~ ..

••
•
•
•• •

o

••

00

o
0.5

6

Dido

000

(d/uu)2
"'"

o

0

0 0

=2.

4

~

iii

....
1.0

2
0

o

o
0.8

0.4

1.2

:\=0.12

2.5

U

-iii

r.

E

E

K\
p=}.O Ml':t
1'=2.5 Ml'a
1'=2.01\lPa
P=I.5 MPa
r=l.o Ml'a

o

"
A

I::.

Q

0

<>
0

Diffusion controlled
.

1.0

0

:>u
:>-

~

1.0

1.0

/

//
I
I

0.2
0

0.8

o

1.0

Y

.

Figurc 5. Dependcncc of the buming rate consta.nt
in the first. st:lg~, 1\1, 11.110 ill the thiru stnge, J{J,
~t differcnt ambient pressures on the illilial
l!cX:lOccmlc mass frad.ion, Y.

/

~

/
/ . .,'

/6 /
~/

/

f /

I,

/

/

/

"

0.4

//

/

/

•

/i(" /,'
/:'

/,'

/

. x-a
- .12
"

0 P=3.0 Ml'a

.•.• .

X=O,13
P=OA ~lPa
.A 1'=0.8 r i Pa
...
D P=1.2 Mra

/ ... \

o

dirrusiyity
0.2

.

"

,R.' J11 IiImh!
.

o

/.

0 1'=1.01\11';\
I::. P=2.0 Ml'a

.. '

I/)-!'

1/'

"

""",,'/ /
,., '/ " / , .. '

/~: /~~.,.,'
!/

c=

O.G

0.5

"..."

"-0 05
",-.~ ......
c=O.I ___ / ,/
/
02, /~ /

I /

0.4

0.8

,,;~"l.­

1.5

O.G

0.6

0
'V

M

0,2

0.4

Figure 4. Dependence of tle droplet lifet.ime, tl, at
different ambient pressures on the initial hexadecane mass fraction, Y.

2.0

0

o

K3

II

0.2

O
.S
~

A P=2.5 MP:t
P=3.0 MP:l

o

1.6

sec/111m 2
Fig'lre 3. Temporal variations of the square of the
droplet diameter, d, and flame diameter, D, with
time.

u

P=1.0 MPa
P= 1.5 MPa
I::. P=2.0 MP:t

o

t/d o2

3.0

o

0.5

o

o
o

1.5

~

0

0,6

0.4

y

0,8

1.0

FIgure G. Dependence of the critical droplet volume,
V c, at diIT<.:rcnt ambient pressllH'S on the ini liai
hc.xaJccallc mac:;s fractioll, Y.

316

COMBUSTION OF INTERACTING DROPLET ARRAYS IN A MICROGRAVITY
ENVIRONMENT*
Daniel L. Dietrich
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
Cleveland , Ohio 44135
and
John B. Haggard
NASA Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

Introduction
This research program involves the study of one and two dimensional arrays of droplets in a
buoyant-free environment. The purpose of the work is to extend the database and theories that
exist for single droplets into the regime where droplet interactions are important The eventual goal
being to use the results of this work as inputs to models on spray combustion where droplets
seldom burn individually; instead the combustion history of a droplet is strongly influenced by the
presence of the neighboring droplets.
Recently, Annamali and Ryan (ref. 1) have summarized the current status of droplet array, cloud
and spray combustion. While no attempt will be made to duplicate this work here, there are several
relevant ideas that should be mentioned. There a number of simplified theories (refs. 2-6), and a
small number of detailed numerical studies (refs. 9 and 10) of droplet vaporization/combustion
where multiple droplet effects are significant. These theories all neglect the effect of buoyancy.
Experimentally, all studies to date show how important the effect of buoyancy is, in fact, it
becomes the dominant transport mechanism in the problem. Only the works of Law and coworkers were performed in an environment where buoyancy effects were small (refs. 11 and 12),
and the authors were limited to studying combustion in high oxygen index, low pressure ambient
environments.
The emphasis of the present investigation is experimental, although comparison will be made to
existing theoretical and numerical treatments when appropriate. Both normal gravity and low
gravity testing will be employed, and the results compared. The work to date will be summarized
in the next section, followed by a section detailing the future plans.

..

Research initiation date: 4/1f) 1.

317

Work to Date
Normal Gravity Droplet Combustion Chamber

As presented in the previous section, nonnal gravity testing will be employed in this work.
Toward this end a combustion chamber to study the burning of single droplets and droplet arrays
was designed and built. The chamber can handle absolute pressures from 0 - 1 atm, and is
equipped with a gas mixing system so that the ambient pressure and gas composition can be
accurately controlled. Inside the chamber, droplet(s) are suspended from 125 11m quartz optical
fibers with a precisely controlled l 250 I.J.ffi bead placed on the end. Droplets are placed on the end
of the fiber with a hypodermic tube attached to a rotary solenoid. Ignition is accomplished with a
length of .010 inch Kanthal (Aluminum alloy) wire heated with a current of approximately 4
amps. The hot-wire is attached to a linear solenoid, and is removed immediately after ignition.
Photographic images are obtained by two orthogonal views; one a backlit view from which the
droplet size as function of time is obtained, and the other from which the flame dynamics are
captured. The entire droplet dispense/ignition and photographic process is controlled with a time
delay relay circuit
One of the first uses of the combustion chamber was to evaluate the suitability of an intensified
array camera to image the flame in the ultra-violet region of the spectrum as opposed to the visual
image usually obtained. This work is in support of the Droplet Combustion Experiment (M.
Vehda-Nayagam, project scientist). Methanol and n-heptane droplets were burned in ambient
environments of Helium/Oxygen and Nitrogen/Oxygen at atmospheric and sub-atmospheric
pressures. The flame images were recorded with the intensified array camera (UV Nikkor lens,
quartz viewing window) and regular black and white video camera. Most of the video with the
intensified camera was taken with a 310 nm bandpass filter in place. The purpose was to attempt
to image the OH emission and compare that image with the visual image.
Figure 1 shows two images, the one on the right being that obtained with the intensified array
camera, and on the left from the black and white video camera at the same time. This was an nheptane droplet burning in a 35% Oxygen/65% Helium (mole fraction), and a total pressure of
0.75 atm. As is easily seen, the two images are very different, with a measurement of the flame
diameter and shape being very different depending on the camera used. At the present time, no
definitive conclusions can be drawn from the existing data, as further analysis of the existing data
is needed, in addition to more data with a color video camera and possibly more fIlters.
Single droplets of methanol and n-decane were studied in high oxygen, low pressure ambients.
The purpose was to duplicate some of the work of Law and co-workers (refs. 13 and 14). The
result of one of these tests is shown in Fig. 2 with the square of the nonnalized droplet diameter
shown as a function of time. "the burning rate constant, defined as the best linear fit between the
two dotted lines in Fig. 2, was 0.84 mm2/sec. This was somewhat lower than the value reported
by Chung and Law. As also seen in Fig. 2, flame extinction occurs before the droplet has
completely vaporized (fuel was visible on the fiber). The extinction diameter for this droplet was
approximately 300 11m. This droplet size was very close to the suspending fiber bead size,
however, so fiber interference effects were no doubt important.
For the same oxygen concentration and fuel as shown for the test in Fig. 2, but higher pressures
(0.3 atm), rnicroexplosions were observed. A sequence of frames from before, during, and after a
microexplosion are shown in Fig. 3. In the beginning, droplet burning was nonnal, but then the
liquid disruption begins and fmally the explosion. After the explosion, nonnal droplet burning
The ability to accurately control the size of the bead is critical when performing the droplet
array studies so that the droplets in the array are as identical as possible (ref. 10).

318

continued if any liquid remained on the fiber. These microexplosions seem to originate on the fiber
indicating fiber interference. Microexplosions also occurred at 0.2 atm, but were less severe, and
typically occurred later in the droplet lifetime. No microexplosions were seen at 0.1 atm.
More recently, work has started on burning multiple droplets. Figure 4 shows two droplets
initially 1 mm in diameter separated by approximately 6 mm. The fuel was n-decane, and the
pressure was 0.1 atm. Three pictures are shown at different times in the droplet lifetime. As
expected, early in the burning history, the two flames merge into a single flame, and later in the
lifetime the two droplets experience less interactions, and burn individually. Because of the low
pressure in the flames in Fig. 4, buoyancy effects were reduced (not eliminated) and the flames
were more spherical.

Reduced Gravity Droplet Combustion
Progress in low gravity has been limited by problems with the experimental apparatus. The major
development in this area has been utilizing extremely small (10-15 ~m) Si-C fibers to su spend
droplets. These fibers are an order of magnitude smaller than the fibers used in most suspended
droplet studies. Figure 5 shows an n-decane droplet suspended from one of these fibers. This
drop was created in low gravity by stringing one of these fibers between the two deployment
needles in the droplet combustion facility of the 2.2 second drop tower. As can easily be seen, the
deviation from spherical symmetry is very small, with the fiber being barely visible. Figures 5
also shows the backlit view of the same droplet during combustion. One of the major advantages
of using these fibers is the potential to perform thermometry measurements in the gas phase of
sootless droplet burning (ref. 15). This is particularly useful when studying extinction
phenomena; enabling one to identify flame position, change in flame temperature, and flame
dynamics at extinction.
Given the encouraging results using these fibers, a new experimental apparatus for the low gravity
facilities is being developed. The experiment is designed to study one and two dimensional arrays
of droplets suspended by the Si-C fiber. The current status of the rig is that the design and
construction are nearly complete. Integration into a drop frame for the 2.2 second drop tower is
under way. Initial testing is expected to begin in the beginning to mid-October.
Another accomplishment is the development of an automatic data processing technique to measure
droplet size as a function of time from drop tower data. The technique is similar to that of Choi ~
al. (ref. 16) and involves grabbing a frame from film (or video) and digitizing it. The edge of the
droplet is then detected by one of two methods (absolute intensity or intensity gradient), and the
area averaged droplet diameter is determined.
Future Work
Work in the remaining 2+ years of the grant will continue in both the normal gravity test cell, and
the low gravity apparatus. Several minor improvements will be made to the normal gravity
apparatus. The ignition system will modified, possibly even incorporating a spark ignition system;
the ultimate goal being to reliably ignite a droplet in the shortest amount of time with as little
disturbance as possible. This work will be done in conjunction with the Droplet Combustion
Experiment (DCE) science team (F. Williams, F. Dryer, and M. Vehda-Nayagam). The fuel
system will be improved to allow accurate delivery of multiple droplets simultaneously. This new
fuel system is nearly complete.
Another area of work that will be done in conjunction with the DCE science team, is on improved
flame imaging. Further testing will be done with the intensified array video camera, a color and
black and white video camera to determine the best method of imaging a droplet flame. For some
of these tests, a small Si-C fiber will be strung across the droplet (not supporting the droplet) and

319

the luminous image of the fiber during combustion will be recorded. The image of the 'glowing'
fiber will be compared to the visual flame images obtained with the video cameras.
In addition, work will continue on attempting to obtain temperature measurements from these
fi bers. Currently, a model is being developed to correct the temperature of the fiber for radiation,
conduction and convective losses. The first experimental work will be conducted in the normal
gravity facility, and if the results are promising, it will be incorporated into the drop rig. Even if
absolute temperature measurements are not possible, these fibers will enable a qualitative
measurement of location of the maximum flame temperature, change in flame temperature as a
function of time and flame width.
Normal gravity work in the next year will be focussed on studying single droplets and linear
droplet arrays. Two fuels will be employed. The first will be methanol, the second n-decane. The
major variables will be the inter-droplet spacing, ambient oxygen concentration, pressure and
diluent (helium or nitrogen). The results of these studies will be compared to similar tests that will
be conducted in the 2.2 second drop tower with the new droplet combustion apparatus.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Annamalai, K. and W. Ryan. "Interactive Processes in Gasificcation and Combustion.
Part I: Liquid Drop Arrays and Clouds," Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 18,
1992, 221.
Brzustowski. T.A., E.M. Twardus, S. Wojcicki and A. Sobiesiak. "Interaction of Two
Burning Fuel Droplets of Arbitrary Size," AIAA Journal 17, No. 11, 1979, 1234.
Labowsky, M. "A Formalism for Calculating the Evaporation Rates of Rapidly
Evaporating Interacting Particles", Combustion Science and Technology 18, 1978, 145.
Labowsky, M. "Calculation of the Burning Rates oflnteracting Fuel Droplets,"
Combustion Science and Technology 22, 1980,217.
Marberry, M., A.K. Ray and K. Leung. "Effect of Multiple Particle Interactions on
Burning Droplets," Combustion and Flame 57, 1984,237.
Samson, R., D. Bedeaux and I.M. Deutch. "A Simple Model of Fuel Spray Burning II.
Linear Droplet Streams," Combustion and Flame 31, 1978,223.
Umemura, A., S. Ogawa and O. Nobunori. "Analysis of the Interaction Between Two
Burning Droplets", Combustion and Flame 41, 1981,45.
Raju, M.S. and W.A. Sirignano. "Unsteady Navier-Stokes Solution for Two Interacting,
Vaporizing Droplets", AIAA-87-0300, AIAA 25th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno,
Neveda, 1987.
Tal, Reuven and W .A. Sirignano. "Cylindrical Cell Model for the Hydrodynamics of
Particle Assemblages at Intermediate Reynolds Numbers", American Institute of Chemical
Engineers Journal 28, No.2, 1982,233.
Miyasaka, K. and C.K. Law. "Combustion of Strongly Interacting Linear Droplet Arrays ",
Eighteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion LThe Combustion Institute, 1981,
283.
Xiong, T.Y., c.K. Law, C.K. and K. Miyasaka. "Interactive Vaporization and
Combustion of Binary Droplet Systems", Twentieth Symposium (International) on
Combustion / The Combustion Institute, 1984, 1781.
Chung, S.H., and C.K. Law. "An Experimental Study of Droplet Extinction in the
Absence of External Convection," Combustion and Flame 64, 1986,237.
Law, c.K., S.H. Chung and N. Srinivasan. "Gas-Phase Quasi-Steadiness and Fuel Vapor
Accumulation Effects in Droplet Burning", Combustion and Flame 38, 1980, 173.

320

14.

15.

Vilimpoc, V. and L.P. Goss. "SiC-Based Thin-Filament Pyrometry: Theory and Thermal
Properties," Twenty-Second Symposium (International) on Combustion I The Combustion
Institute, 1988, 1907.
"Choi, M.Y., F.L. Dryer, J.B. Haggard, M.H. Brace. "Further Observations on Microgravity Droplet Combustion in the NASA-Lewis Drop Tower Facilities: A Digital
Processing Techniqui for Droplet Burning Data," Third International Colloquium on Drops
and Bubbles, Monterey, California, 1988.

Figure 1.

Comparison of images from a black and white video camera (left) and intensified
array video camera with 310 run bandpass filter in place. n-Heptane in a 0.75 attn,
0.35/0.65 Oxygen/Helium (mole fraction) ambient.

-•

•

•

•

..

·' ~
.. 1

0.8-

.'

N

I

<

o

~

-

'Il.
I ....

0.6-

-

.' ,...

Q
N

<

~

Q

,

'"

\

0.4-

.

.~

•

~,....

0.2-

I

.

..-~~.,.

K =0.84 mm"2/sec

0~~~~'-~1~~-r~1~~~'-~'1~~-r~

o

Figure 2.

0.5

1
Time (sec)

1.5

2

Normalized volume averaged droplet diameter as a function of time for n-decane
burning in a 0.1 atm, 0.5/0.5 Oxygen/Nitrogen (mole fraction) ambient

321

Figure 3.

n-Decane in 0.3 atm, 0.5ft).5 Oxygen/Nitrogen ambient, before (left), during
(center) and after (right) microexplosion.

Figure 4.

Two n-decane droplets burning in air at 0.1 atm on 125 J.UI1 fibers at three times
during the burning history.

Figure 5.

n-Decane droplet in air at 1 atm supported on a 10-15 J.UI1 Si-C fiber before (left)
and during combustion (right).

322

J

COMMENTS
Question (C.T. Avedisian, Cornell University): In looking at your video of the combustion of droplet arrays
in microgravity using fiber supported droplets, some work that Brzustowski and co-workers did in the late
70's on unsupported droplet arrays in microgravity came to my mind. Do you intend to include a study of
unsupported droplet ar rays in your work?
Answer: Not in the immediate future (1 year). We are, however. co nsidering looking at unsupported arrays
in th e last year of funding.

323

THE ELECTROSPRAY: FUNDAMENTALS AND COMBUSTION
APPLICATIONS
Alessandro Gomez
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut 06520

1.

Introduction

Liquid fuel dispersion in practical systems is typically achieved by spraying the fuel into a polydisperse distribution of droplets
evaporating and burning in a turbulent gaseous environment. In view of the nearly unsurmountable difficulties of this two-phase
flow. it would be useful to use an experimental arrangement that allow a systematic study of spray evolution and burning in
configurations of gradually increasing levels of complexity. starting from laminar sprays to fully turbulent ones. An Electrostatic
Spray (ES) of charged droplets lends itself to this type of combustion experiments under well-defmed conditions and can be used to
synthesize gradually more complex spray environments. In its simplest configuration. a liquid is fed into a small metal tube
maintained at several kilovolts relative to a ground electrode few centimeters away. Under the action of the electric field, the liquid
meniscus at the outlet of the capillary takes a conical shape. with a thin jet emerging from the cone tip. This jet breaks up
farther downstream into a fine spray of charged droplets (see Fig. 1 and ref. 1). Several advantages distinguish the electrospray
from alternative atomization techniques: the self-dispersion property of the spray due to coulombic repulsion; the absence of
droplet coalescence; the potential control of the trajectories of charged droplets by suitable disposition of electrostatic fields; and
the decoupling of atomization. which is strictly electrostatic. from gas flow processes. Furthermore. as recently shown in our
laboratory (ref. 2). the electrospray can produce quasi-monodisperse droplets over a very broad size range (1-100 Jlm).
The ultimate objective of this research project is to study the formation and burning of electro sprays of liquid fuels first in laminar
regimes and then in turbulent ones. Combustion will eventually be investigated in conditions of three-dimensional droplet-droplet
interaction. for which experimental studies have been limited to either qualitative observations in sprays or more quantitative
observations on simplified systems consisting of a small number of droplets or droplet arrays (refs. 3-6). The compactness and
potential controllability of this spray generation system makes it appealing for studies to be undertaken in the next two years on
electrospray combustion in reduced-gravity environments such as those achievable at NASA microgravity test facilities.
2.

Summary of the Research Activity from 3-1-1991 to 8-31-1992

The project has developed along two parallel avenues: we have performed a variety of cold flow experiments aimed at examining
the fundamental mechanism of electrospray atomization and dispersion as well as identifying and characterizing the domain of
operating variables under which the generated droplets are quasi-monodisperse. The other focus of the research has been on the
combustion of the electrospray in laminar regime: we have constructed a counterflow spray burner. tested it at normal gravity and
begun to examine the dynamics of the interaction of droplets and flame. Primary diagnostic tools are: a commercial Phase
Doppler Anemometer (PDA), the workhorse of this phase of the project. used to measure distributions of droplet size and either
axial or radial velocity component; and a shadowgraph system consisting of a nanosecond flashlamp, a long-range microscope and
a CCD camera. capable of capturing and digitizing images of droplet shadows with an overall magnification of up to llOOX.
Further details are given in the seven publications (refs. 2. 7-12) that have resulted from the research activity in the frrst seventeen
months of the project.
2.1

Fundamentals of Electrospray Atomization

Research on the fundamentals of electro spray atomization is crucial to develop strategies for optimizing the ES and tailoring it to
a particular application. In particular. it is necessary to: define and understand limits of operation of the system; infer scaling laws
that would allow to generalize experimental findings and perform scale-up to commercially interesting liquid flow-rates. In this
phase of the srudy we fIrst obtained a phenomenological picture of the atomization and dispersion processes. as sketched in Fig. 1,
through flash shadow graphs of the breakup region (refs. 2 and 10). When narrow size distributions are generated, the liquid exits
the cone formed at the outlet of the charged capillary as a thin. stable. thread that persists for a short distance. This ligament then
breaks up into droplets of bimodal size distribution. with primary, larger droplets. and satellite ones. on average one third smaller.
Farther downstream. droplets in the spray core become nearly monodisperse as the satellites. driven by the electric field. migrate
more rapidly away from the spray axis because of higher charge to mass ratio and lower inertia. The core of uniform droplets was
found to carry 97% of the total flow rate and 85% of the total current; the remainder is present in a shroud of satellites. We also
identified the operating conditions under which the electro spray generates monodisperse droplets. A map of the ES stability
domain in the applied-voltage vs liquid flow rate plane was obtained for heptane, doped with the antistatic additive (Stadis 450,

Preceding Page Blank
325

0.3% by weight) to provide electric conductivity. A domain was identified in which monodisperse droplets were generated whose
size was primarily controlled by the liquid flow rate and, to a less extent. by the applied voltage (ref. 12). Since the ultimate goal
was to evaluate the size and monodispersity of the spray, results are plotted in Fig. 2 as average droplet diameter. measured by the
PDA versus applied voltage for several liquid flow rates. For all measurements the droplet standard deviation was less than 10 %
of the average diameter. the latter spanning a remarkable range of over two orders of magnitude (1-140 )..lm). The boundaries of
this stability region were found to be determined by the onset of different types of instabilities: at a given flow rate, the minimum
voltage was set by the onset of pUlsations in the liquid meniscus. whereas the maximum voltage was typically set by the onset of
traverse instabilities on the jet issuing from the conical meniscus. The lower flow rate limit was set by diagnostic limitations:
the Phase Doppler system cannot. in fact, measure submicron droplets; the upper limit in flow rate was instead determined by the
onset of droplet fission. which is achieved when Coulomb repulsion of the electrical charges on the droplet surface overcomes
surface tension and the droplet disrupts, as discussed below in greater detail.
We also examined in detail a prototypical ES, operated for diagnostic convenience in conditions resulting in the generation of
monodisperse droplets measuring 32 11m in diameter. After detailed scans of the spray in both radial and axial directions, we first
observed that droplet velocity and number density profiles are self-similar in the electrospray. Efforts were then focused on the
inference of the electric field that is the driving force determining spray formation and dispersion. Such determination is important
for spray modelling, it can help the analysis of the complex electro-hydrodynamics in the liquid meniscus and it is also useful to
define limits of operation of the system. The electric field was determined indirectly by quantifying through a variety of
measurements on the charged droplets the electrostatic force acting on them (ref. 10). To this end, we: a) measured both droplet
and gas velocity, droplet size and average interdroplet spacing; b) inferred droplet charge from measurements of the total current
carried by monodisperse droplets using a specially fabricated, variable-aperture electrode; and c) solved the equation of motion for
an isolated droplet under the action of electrostatic. gravitational and drag forces. We found that droplets, driven by the field, are
ejected from the jet at relatively high velocity. They maintain this velocity even though the field is rapidly decreasing becl!use of
inertia effects and ultimately decelerate under the action of drag force and a progressively weaker electrostatic force. The net electric
field acting on the droplet is due primarily to the external field. except near the break-up region of the spray, where the internal
field due to space charge appears also to be important. Indeed, droplet coulombic repulsion plays a crucial role: if only the
external field were acting on the droplets. they would predominantly persist in their axial trajectory without dispersing into a
spray. Space charge effects. coupled with diverging lines of the external field between capillary and ground electrode ultimately
lead to spray dispersion.
2.2

Electrospray Combustion

Spray combustion in a stagnation-point flow configuration has been examined experimentally. numerically and analytically in
diffusion flames in a few recent studies (refs. 13-17). The focus of our effort has been to study the effects of the interaction
between flow field. flame and droplets on the structure of the counterflow spray diffusion flame (ref. 7). We also found the fust
evidence in a burning spray of secondary atomization due to Coulomb fission (ref. 11).
The counterflow diffusion flame burner (Fig. 3) has been described elsewhere (ref. 7). Briefly, electrosprayed heptane and a co-flow
of N2 flowed through the bottom half of the burner and oxygen was admitted through the top one. Combustion occurred in a gap
between top and lower half of the burner. near the stagnation region between the two impinging streams. Experiments were
performed on two heptane flames. both operated at the same overall equivalence ratio of 0.36. and, thus. both having the same
adiabatic flame temperature. The first flame. labelled LS. was characterized by a nominal strain rate of 3 s -1. droplet mean
diameter and mean velocity near the burner mouth equal to 36.3 11m and 0.63 mls respectively. In the second flame. labelled HS.
strain rate. initial droplet size and droplet relative velocity were increased to 4.3 s-l, 47.3 11m and l.3 mls respectively. The ratio
of standard deviation and mean droplet size near the burner mouth were 0.09 and 0.13 in the two flames and therefore droplets can
be considered quasi-monodisperse. at least initially. Both flames are in a diluted spray regime where droplet-droplet interactions are
expected to be negligible (ref. 18). Droplets entered the combustion region with a substantial slip with respect to a host gas
velocity of only a few cm/s.
In Fig. 4 the average droplet diameter and gas-phase temperature. measured along the burner axis, are plotted versus the distance
from the bottom burner rim. z, for the two heptane flames: open symbols refer to Flame LS (Low Strain rate) and full symbols to
Flame HS (High Strain rate). The error bars on the droplet diameter have a width equal to two standard deviations. The
temperature was measured with a fine silica coated. Pt-Ptl13%Rh thermocouple. In the case of Flame LS. we observe that as
droplets approach the combustion region and the stagnation plane. the temperature begins to rise and droplet mean diameter
decreases gently in the first 4.5 millimeters and much more abruptly in the subsequent two millimeters. Droplets disappear at
about 5.7 mm from the burner mouth. before reaching the flame that was located at 1;=7 mm and appeared like a thin, flat sheet.
of a blue-violet color. In the case of the higher strain rate heptane flame. HS. the flame had an appearance markedly different from
Flame LS and exhibited a more complex structure. We observe a thin blue region, similar to that of Flame LS, at 1;=7.1 mm.
another thin sheet characterized by violet luminescence at 1;=7.3 mm and a thick orange region between 1;=7.7 and z=9.6 mm.
whose luminosity is presumably due to the presence of soot particles. Some of the droplets penetrated through the blue flame and
continued to burn within the oxidizer region where they eventually disappeared in the homogeneously thick orange region. Larger
droplets burning individually could be identified by their luminous wake occasionally prolPlding beyond the uniform orange
region. From these measurements one concludes that Flame LS behaves in some respects as a purely gaseous diffusion flame

326

since droplets never directly interact with the flame but simply provide a source of heptane vapor, which then diffuses towards the
oxidizer region. This observation confirms numerical predictions under similar conditions (refs. 14, 17) and is also consistent
with visual observations of analogous spray flames (ref. 15. 17). Flame HS on the other hand clearly exhibit a direct interaction
of droplets and flame. The dramatically different appearance of the two flames can be explained as follows. Firs~ in the case of
Flame HS the droplet mean size and axial velocity component measured close to the burner mouth are 30 % larger and twice as
large as compared to Flame LS. The larger size and larger velocity of droplets in HS result in longer lifetime (based on d-square
law) and shorter residence time. which accounts for droplet survival over significantly longer distances as compared to Flame LS.
Second. inertia effects and the consequent inability of the droplets to follow the host gas are more significant in the higher strain
rate flame.
A comparison between the temperature profiles in the two heptane flames (Fig. 4) shows that the flame with the nominally higher
strain rate, Flame HS has a substantially broader temperature profile. This finding is in contrast with what expected in purely
gaseous diffusion flames on the basis of both theoretical analyses, that predict proportionality between the width of the
temperature proftle and the inverse of the square root of the strain rate (ref. 19). and numerical predictions (ref. 20). Furthermore.
even though the two flames have identical overall equivalence ratios and nearly equal adiabatic flame temperatures. Flame HS has a
peak temperature 240 K higher than Flame LS. This difference is probably an effect of the local stoichiometry. Since N 2 was
introduced only from the fuel side. the inert concentration is a monotonically decreasing function of z. Thus, droplets cross the
blue flame in Flame HS and continue 1.0 burn stoichiometrically in an oxygen rich environment while the inert concentration
progressively decreases.
The error bars on the droplet diameters in Fig. 3 show that the initially narrow size distribution broadens in the course of
evaporation. This effect can be attributed 1.0 size-dependent droplet evaporation rate and residence time, as explained in detail in ref.
7. Also noteworthy is the non-monotonic behavior in Flame HS of the mean droplet diameter as function of the axial coordinate.
z. which is due to an inertia separation effect (ref. 7).
2.3

Fission of charged Droplet

Measurements of charge and size of droplets generated in electrostatic sprays of heptane operated in the conditions described in
Section 2.1 showed that: a) droplet charge-to-volume ratio is a monotonically decreasing function of droplet size; and b) that the
larger are the droplets the closer they are 1.0 the limiting charge at which they rupture. This limit is attained when the Coulombic
repulsion of surface charge overcomes surface tension (ref. 21). Thus. somewhat paradoxically, large droplets with relatively low
charge-to-volurne ratio are proner to disintegrate than smaller droplets with higher ratios. Exploiting these fmdings, for the first
time we have captured photographically the fission of nearly-mono disperse. charged droplets generated by an electrospray (Fig. 5 ).
Observed fissile patterns show that droplet disintegration is characterized by the formation of a tail. or "cone", reminiscent of the
conical liquid meniscus from which the electrospray originates (see Fig. 1). From the tip of this cone. a stream of droplets is
ejected. all much smaller in size than the parent droplet and apparently equisized. Consequently, since droplet evaporation time
varies with the square of the droplet diameter at typical prevailing conditions, the offspring droplets will vaporize at much faster
rate than will the residual "parent" droplet. A phenomenological explanation of the observed dependence of charge density on
droplet size has been offered in terms of the relative magnitude of two characteristic times: an electric relaxation time, i.e. a
characteristic time for charge motion in the liquid or on the liquid surface; and a charactenstic fluid time. i.e. the time over which
varicose wave instabilities propagate along the axis of the liquid jet from which the electtospray originates. Some implications
of these findings, with particular emphasis 1.0 electro spray ionization. a technique widely used in biochemical mass-spectrometry
are discussed in (ref. 9).
Experimental evidence of droplet fission was also obtained in the combustion of electrosprays (ref. 11). PDA measurements in
the flame labelled LS in Fig. 4 showed in fact a peculiar feature of the size distributions in the vicinity of the flame. Fig. 6
shows one such distribution as measured at z= 5.5 mm. Notice the bimodality of the distribution with the appearance of a
secondary peak in correspondence of diameters of 2-3 11m. i.e. one order of magnitude smaller than the mean droplet diameter. No
evaporation mechanism can account for this fmding, which can be explained only in terms of a disintegration of droplets into fmer
fragments of consistently much smaller size. Other evidence in support of the existence of secondary atomization is offered by
velocity measurements showing that in correspondence with secondary peaks in the size distribution both radial and axial
components of the droplet velocity are unusually large, i.e. one or two orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding mean
values. which is indicative of the occurrence of an ejection process. This disruption occurs despite the presence of chemi-ions and
electrons that are naturally present in the flame and that might have partially or totally neutralized the droplet. as originally
suggested by Weinberg (ref. 22). The morphology of the fission process captured in cold flow experiments (Fig. 5) is consistent
with the size distribution found in these combustion experiments.
3.0

Future Plans

Task 1- We would like first to characterize as quantitatively as possible the evolution of the spray as the droplets approach the
flame. With the measurements of droplet size, velocity and gas-phase temperature. we should to be able to reconstruct the
evolution of the droplet size distribution as the droplets approach the flame and to determine the droplet vaporization rate.

327

Task -2 Further studies are needed to capture droplet fission in combustion environments and to clarify whether disruption is
characterized by only 1-2 % liquid mass loss, or whether the mass loss can be substantially higher because of the presence of
chemi-ions· . In the fust case, the disruption process enhances the evaporation rate of only a small fraction of the liquid supply
but it may still aid in the overall stability of the spray flame. In the second case, the advantages of secondary atomization would
be far more dramatic. A suitable electrostatic atomizer would generate directly large droplets, with the inherent advantage of good
penetration of fuel into the oxidizer. and iruiirectly small droplets, via Coulombic fission.with the advantage of rapid evaporation
and effective molecular mixing of fuel and oxidizer.
Task 3- Experiments to date have been conducted in a regime of diluted spray, as discussed in Section 2.2. To operate the spray
ultimately in a regime of droplet-droplet interaction. we would like to develop strategies to focus electrostatically the spray by
manipUlating droplet trajectories with electric fields and therefore controlling interdroplet spacing If space charge effects are
limiting, partial neutralization of droplet charge by an aerosol neutralizer may be necessary before focusing can be implemented.
Task 4 - Part of the experimental program in the third and fourth year would be implemented at the 2s Drop Tower NASA
facility. Efforts will be made to retrofit the current version of the counterflow burner to the drop-package before the end of the
current year. The obvious goal is that of studying spray combustion in an environment free of natural convection effects.
Buoyancy can generally playa role in displacing the flame in low strain rates flames, as we also observed in purely gaseous
flames (ref. 24). In the particular case of spray flames, its role will become very significant in regimes of droplet-droplet
interaction, when the characteristic length of the Grashof number is no longer the droplet size but the "spray size ." In this
context, efforts in task 3 will be crucial.
Task S- To be able to compare the results of the laminar spray experiments in the counterflow configuration with computations,
Prof. M. D. Smooke will develop a model that accounts for the interchange of mass, momentum, chemical species and energy
between the gas and liquid phases in a monodisperse spray. Building upon the experience obtained in the investigation of detailed
transport/finite rate chemistry models of gaseous premixed and nonpremixed counterflow systems (refs. 20, 2S, 26), we plan to
solve the complete liquid-gas phase system with a modified version of the algorithm described in detail in the literature (ref. 2S),
after coupling in the liquid phase by utilizing the ideas of Sirignano and coworkers (ref. 14). This approach will enable us to
investigate the effects of droplet size, droplet spacing and the effects of droplet vaporization on flame location, temperature and
species distributions. The interaction between modeling and experiments will help in interpreting the experimental fmdings and
in validating the model both at normal and reduced gravity.
Task 6- We plan to complement the measurements of droplet size and velocity with spectroscopic determination at normal
gravity of the concentration of major gaseous species as well as of some radicals. This study will be valuable for determining
flame location, studying its evolution, evaluating oxidizer penetration into the droplet-laden region and comparing results with
numerical predictions. Experiments will be performed in collaboration with Prof. M. B. Long. Major species such as 2 , CO 2 ,
Hz and N 2 will be detected by spontaneous Raman scattering. For radical such as OH and CH, on the other hand, the laser will
be tuned to an absorption line and the fluorescence will be detected at a wavelength shifted from that of the input laser. Point
measurements can be performed by using optical ftlters to reject partially or totally the droplet intense elastic light scattering in
combination with a synchronization scheme in which spectroscopic signals will be collected conditionally upon the absence of
droplets in the laser probe volume. Since the anticipated interdroplet spacings are in the order of ten droplet diameters and droplet
data rate are in the order of a few Hz, this strategy should be easily realizable. We would also like to initiate imaging experiments
by combining a CCD detector with a pulsed laser illumination sheet or line and ultimately map the concentrations in a single
plane or line intersecting the spray (see for example ref. 27).

°

°

Task 7- The last phase of the project will be devoted to turbulent sprays. The same type of measurements performed in laminar
sprays will be repeated in carefully selected environments in which turbulence is "injected" in the gaseous stream by synthesizing
various turbulent scenarios, characterized by different intensities and scales. Since liquid atomization is achieved strictly by
charging, in contrast with aerodynamic atomization mechanisms, the host gas where the liquid is injected can in fact be controlled
independently.
4.0
1.

2.
3.
4.
S.
6.

References
Zeleny, J. t Phys. Rev. 10 , p.1 (1917).
Gomez, A. and Tang, K., Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems,
ICLASS-91, Gaithersburg, MD, U.S.A., H. G. Semerjian Ed., NIST Special Publication No. 813, p.80S (1991).
Twardus, E.M. and Brzustowki, T.A., Combust . Sci. and Technol., 17, p.21S (1978).
Brzustowski, T.A., Twardus, E.M., Wojcicki. S. and Sobiesiak, A., AIAA J., 17, p.1 234 (1 979).
Sangiovanni, IJ. and Kesten, A.S., Sixteenth Symposium (Internalional) on Combustion, p.S77, The Combustion
Institute (1977).
Sangiovanni, JJ. and Labowski, M., Combust . Flame, 47, p.1S (1982).

* Taflin et aI. (ref. 23), in fact, reported that in ionized gaseous medium the disruption can differ substantially from that in
unionized gases and can be characterized by much larger mass loss.

328

__J

- -- -

8.
9.
10.
11.

F~

13.
14.
15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
26.
25.
26.
27.

-

Chen. G. and Gomez. A .• "Counterfow Diffusion Flames of Quasi-Monodisperse Electrostatic Sprays,"' to appear in
Twentyjounh Symposium (InJemaJional) on Combuslion. (The Combustion Institute. Pittsburgh. PA. 1992).
Gomez. A. and Tang. K.. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Liquid Atomization and Spray Systems.
ICLASS-91. H. G. Semerjians. Eds .• (NIST Special Publication 813. Gaithersburg. MD.VSA. p.805. 1991).
Gomez. A. and Tang. K .• ''Fission of Charged Droplets in Electrostatic Sprays". submitted to Phys. Fluids A (1992).
Tang. K. and Gomez. A.: "On the Structure of an Electrostatic Spray of Monodisperse Droplets". submitted to Phys.
Fluids A (1992).
Gomez. A. and Chen. G .• "Secondary Atomization in the Combustion of Electrostatic Sprays." submitted to Combust. and

7.

12.

-

(1992).

Gomez. A. and Tang. K.. "Stability Domain of an Electrospray Generating Monodisperse Droplets in the Size Range 1-140
!-lm". to appear in 1. Aerosol Sci. (1992).
Greenberg. lB .• Albagli. D. and Tambour. Y.. Combusl. Sci. and Tech., 50. p. 255 (1986).
Continillo. G. and Sirignano. W.A .• Comb. Flame 81. p.325 (1990).
Li. S.C .. Libby. P.A. and Williams. F.A. "Experimental and Theoretical studies of Counterfow Spray Diffusion Flames."
to appear in TwenJy-fourlh Symposium (Inlernational) on Combuslion. (The Combustion Institute. Pittsburgh. PA.
1992).
Chen. N. H.. Rogg. B. and Bray. K.N.C .• "Modelling Laminar Two-phase Counterflow Flames with Detailed Chemistry
and Transport". to appear in TwenJy·fourth Symposium (InJerlUllional) on Combustion. (The Combustion Institute.
Pittsburgh. P A. 1992).
Lacas. F .. Darabiha. N .. Veraseve\. P.. Rolon. J.e. and Cande\. S .. "Influence of Number Density on the Structure of
Strained Laminar Spray Flames ". [0 appear in Twent y-fourth S)'mposium (InlernaJionaJ) on Combustion. (The
Combustion Institute. Pittsburgh. PA. 1992).
FJeth. G.Moo Prog . Energy CombuSI . Sci . 9. p.l (1983).
Zeldovich. Ya.B .• Barenblatt. G.1.. Librovich, V.B. and Makhviladze. G.M.: The Mathematical Theory oi Combustion
and Explosions. Ch. 8. Plenum (1985) .
Puri. IX. Seshadri. K .. Smooke. M.D. and Keyes. D.E .. CombuSI . Sci. and Tech . 56. p.l (1987).
Rayleigh. Phi/os. Mag. 14. p.1 84 (1882).
Thong. K.C. and Weinberg. FJ .. Proc . Roy . Soc. Lond. A 324. p.201 (1971).
D. C. Taflin. T. L. Ward and E. 1 Davis. Langmuir 5. p.376 (1989).
Gomez. A. and Rosner. D. E .• 'Thermophoretic Effects on Particles in Counterflow Laminar Diffusion Flames." to appear
in CombuSI . Sci. and Tech. (1992) .
Giovangigli. V. and Smooke. M. Doo Comb. Sci. and Tech .• 53 . p.23 (1987).
Smooke. M. D .• Puri. I. K. and Seshadri. K.. TwenJy.Firsl Symposium (Internalional) on Combust/on. p. 1783. The
Combustion Institute. 1987.
Giovanglgli. V. and Smooke. M. D .. Comb . Sci. and Tech .. 53. p.23 (1987).
Smooke. M. D .. Lin. Poo Lam. 1. K. and long. M.B .. Twenly-Third Symposium (InlernaJiona/J on Combustion. p. 575.
The Combustion Institute. 1991.

~

o

~

o

o

' 0 •

o
00
00
o 00

0 0

o
0

o
o

0 0

0

0

o

0

0

0

0°0

o

0

o

0

0

80

60

0
°

0

0

0

- - 0- 6 20 tcI1w
~ 0- 8 00 tcI1w
0- 9 98 tcI1w
- - 0- 11.7 tcI1w
- - 0- 1M tcI1w
- 0 - 176tc11w
~ 0- 20.8 tcI1w
-0-2UtcI1w
_ _ Qo 21.• ccIbr

IDO

40

o 0 00

o

- - 'J- .. 90 CCIhr
_____ Q- J 40 ccIhr

0

e
0

°0°
0
0

0

0

~
u

°0 0

00

""
l:l
c..

00

0

E

'>- 0 2S tcI1w
'>- 0 39 C<ihr
'>- 0 93 C<ihr

')-II8c<i111
--0-2j7c<i111

120

.

satellite dropleLS

-

I ~O

20

0

0

••

0

o
o

0

primary droplets

Q

"

•

•

1

to.

.. I

I I I Ii" I

,

•

n ...

'i

0

o

o

4

0

VoltaIC (Kv)

Fig. l.

Schematic of an eIectrospray.

Fig .. 2

329

Droplet average diameter versus applied voltage for
various liquid flow rates.

6

2000

•

1800
1600
z

1400
1200...,
lOoo~
'-'

800
600
400
200
N2 -

o

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

z (mm)
Fig. 3

Counteflow spray diffusion flame burner.

Fig. 4

Average droplet diameter (squares) and gas-phase
temperature (circles) measured along the burner axis
versus distance from the bottom burner rim.

57

43

III

"
C
,
o

2'

u

14

o

Fig. 5

Microphotograph of a droplet in the act of

Fig. 6

disin tegrarin g.

Droplet size distribution measured at z:=5.5 mm

in Flame LS.

See Cblor Plate G-6
330

I

i

CHARACTERIZING DROPLET COMBUSTION OF PURE AND
MULTI-COMPONENT LIQUID FUELS IN A
MICROGRAVITY EN VIRONMENT
Gregory S. Jackson and C. Thomas Avedisian
Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Cornell University
Ithica, New York 14853

Introduction
The importance of understanding the effects of fuel composition. length scales. and other parameters on the
combustion of liquid fuels has motivated the examination of simple flames which have easily characterized flow
fields and hence. the potential of being modeled accurately. One such flame for liquid fuel combustion is the
spherically symmetric droplet flame which can be achieved in an environment with sufficiently low gravity (i.e .. low
buoyancy). To examine fundamental characteristics of spherically symmetric droplet combustion. a drop tower
facility has been employed to provide a microgravity environment to study droplet combustion. This paper gives a
brief review of results obtained over the past three years under NASA sponsorship (grant NAG3 -987).
Important aspects which were studied to characterize the burning of liquid droplets included: 1) droplet burning rate
constants (K) which assess the rate of heat transfer to the liquid fuel from the exothermic gas-phase reactions. 2)
extinction of the droplet flame before complete vaporization which indicates the possibility of incomplete
combustion. 3) soot formation inside the spherical droplet flame. and 4) microexplosions and preferential
vaporization exhibited by multi-stage combustion for droplets of miscible mixtures. The spherically symmetric
configuration of microgravity droplet combustion allows for parameters such as average burning rates. flame standoff ratios, and location of soot agglomerates in the flame to be defined without the effects of natural convective
flows, and effects of droplet size in microgravity combustion are not masked by the length scale dependence of
natural convective flows.
A wide range of pure and blended fuels were studied in air at standard room temperature and pressure in a low
gravity environment on board the drop tower. Results from some of these fuels are briefly reviewed here: pure nheptane. pure l-chloro-octane. heptane/monochloro-octane mixtures. pure methanol. methanol/toluene mixtures. and
methanoVdodecanol mixtures. The bulk of experimental results reported here were obtained by studying free
unsupported droplets with initial diameters (Do) ranging from 0.4 to 0.7 mm. A more limited series of experiments
were carried out on fiber-s uspended droplets. with Do up to l.l mm. to examine the effect of initial diameter on the
burning of sooting fuels. Different mixture compositions were burned to assess the affects of additives on soot
emissions. extinction. and microexplosions.
Experimental Set-uD and Data Extraction
The original drop tower facility as well as the technique for creating free-floating stationary droplets has been
described in detail previously [ref. 1. 2]. Many modifications were implemented over the past three years to
improve the quality of data obtained from the experiments [refs. 3,4, 7]. The experimental package contains a
combustion chamber with the droplet generator. ignition circuitry, a high-speed movie camera, and a low-lux CCD
camera for visualization of the flame boundary. The drop package experiences free fall for about 1.2 s. Some
previous experiments showed that the increase in gravity levels in the latter half of free fall due to air drag around
the package increased buoyant flows around larger droplets wilh Do > 0.80 mm [ref. 3]. Thus, in order to observe
spherically symmetric combustion for the longer-burning larger droplets. a drag shield was built in which the
experimental package can fall freely with minimal air drag for the entire period of free fall.
Two types of burning droplet experiments were performed in the drop tower: free unsupported droplets and fibersuspended droplets. To effectively levitate unsupported droplets in microgravity, a droplet deployment technique
based on the "ink jet" method was employed [refs 1,7). For the suspended droplets, a 30 to 50 J.UIl diameter quartz

331

---"

---- " - - -

fiber was used. The fiber diameter was kept very small in order to minimize its influence on the burning process.
Unsupported droplet experiments reported here included the following fuels: n-heptane. methanol. methanol/toluene
mixtures. and methanoVdodecanol mixtures. Suspended droplet experiments reviewed here include pure heptane.
pure monochloro-octane. and monochloro-octane/heptane mixtures. Because suspended n-heptane droplets had
burning rates and flame stand-off ratios which agreed well with burning rates and flame stand-off ratios of
similarly-sized unsupported droplets. the fiber was assumed to have a negligible impact on the combustion process.
Droplets were ignited about 15 ms after the package was released into free fall by two spark discharges on opposite
sides of the droplet. Considerable efforts were spent to develop a multiple spark circuit with the capability of
adjusting the spark energy. which was controlled by varying the spark duration. the voltage of the energy-storing
capacitors, and/or the current through the electrodes. The electrodes for the spark were retracted away from the
flame after ignition. Retraction was initially performed by a solenoid-activated spring mechanism which retracted
the entire electrode mount upwardly [ref. 3, 5, 7], but more recent experiments have used a mechanism where only
the electrodes are retracted in a radially outward direction [ref. 4].
Droplet diameter measurements were obtained from the high-speed movie records with framing rates ranging from
lOO to 250 frames per second. Measurements were taken with a computer-based image analysis system (Image
Analyst™, Automatix Inc .. Billerica. MA). For suspended droplets. measurements were not taken when the average
droplet diameter became less than 8 times the nominal fiber diameter because of concerns about the influence of the
fiber on the burning process when the fiber diameter becomes a significant fraction of the droplet diameter. The
region for calculating the average droplet radius for the suspended droplets was defined as lying between the
locations where the liquid surface changed concavity near the fiber, both at the top and at the bottom of the droplet.
Results and Discussion
Heptane. Monochloro-octane. and HeptanelMonochloro-octane Mixtures
Burning rate constants were found for unsupported and suspended n-heptane droplets with Do ranging from 0.40 to
1.05 mm and for suspended I-chloro-octane droplets with Do from 0.45 to 1.10 mm [ref. 3 - 5]. N-heptane droplets
larger than 0.9 mm and I-chloro-octane droplets larger than 0.8 mm had burning times longer than the duration of
free-fall. However. enough of the burning history was recorded for these larger droplets to get a reasonable
assessment of K during the period of so-called steady burning after the initial heat-up period. Representative
examples of droplet diameter-squared profiles for unsupported n-heptane droplets are shown in fig. 1. Burning rate
constants were found with a least-squared linear regression of the droplet diameter-squared data vs. time. Data
from the initial period of droplet heat-up and gas-phase vapor accumulation were excluded from the linear
regression . The differences in the slopes of the two profiles in fig. I reflect a decreased burning rate for the larger
n-heptane droplets. For both n-heptane and monochloro-octane droplets with Do around 0.60 mm. K consistently had
values which were more than 20% higher than those for droplets with Do around 1.00 mm.
Both heptane and monochloro-octane droplets exhibited common trends in the development of the flame and a shelllike structure of soot (i.e .. soot shell) between the droplet and the flame. Soot particles form rapidly enough for all
but the smaller-sized heptane droplets. such that thermophoretic forces overtake outward inertia created from the
Stefan flow and the particles are pushed inward to a region where the themrophoretic forces balance the outwardly
directed drag forces. The soot shell begins to take shape as new particles collect in this region. As burning
progresses. the particles begin to agglomerate and the large soot agglomerates are eventually pushed away from the
droplet and into the flame zone because the outward drag force increases more rapidly with particle size than does
the thermophoretic force [ref. 3]. The soot agglomerates generally escape the flame without complete oxidation
implying a loss in heat generation due to unoxidized carbon. As vaporization is completed, the contracting flame
passes through and disrupts the remaining soot.
Fig. 2 shows two representative photographic sequences of n-heptane droplets burning at low gravity: an
unsupported droplet with Do = 0.69 mm and a suspended droplet with Do = 0.75 mm. The two sequences have
approximately the same tlDo2 values to provide some basis for comparison and to show the similarities between the
unsupported droplet flames and the suspended droplet flames. The bright particles in fig. 2 are radiating soot
particles emitted from the flame without undergoing complete oxidation. The fiber-supported droplet sequence
shows some soot agglomerates collecting on the fiber. perhaps due to thermophoresis. However, because burning
rates and dimensionless soot shell diameters for fiber-supported droplets agreed well with those of unsupported
droplets of similar initial size, the effect on burning of the soot/fiber interactions was assumed to be negligible.

332

i
\

The smaller heptane droplets did not show any soot shell formation until near the end of burning, perhaps due to
their higher vaporization rates and the lower residence times for fuel particles inside the flame. On the other hand,
the larger heptane droplets (Do> 0.6 mm) formed soot shells early in the combustion process and emitted soot
agglomerates as combustion proceeded until the end of burning. The smaller monochloro-octane droplets exhibited
soot shell development. but their soot structures were much less dense and their emissions greatly reduced in
comparison to the larger monochloro-octane droplets.
The flame luminosity, soot emissions, and burning rates of 25%,50%, and 75% v/v heptane in monochloro-octane
suspended droplets fell between those of the two pure components [ref. 3]. The photographic records suggest that
more than 25% v/v heptane must be added to monochloro-octane before soot emissions are noticeably reduced as the
25% heptane mixture droplets appeared to soot almost as heavily as pure monochloro-octane droplets of similar size.
No multi-stage combustion process was observed for these mixtures.
Photographic records of the pure heptane and monochloro-octane droplets suggest that the amount of soot collected
in the shell and unoxidized by the flame may be a more sensitive function of the droplet diameter than a [)2
dependence. Longer residence time for fuel molecules inside the droplet flame should promote fuel pyrolysis and
soot production. An approximate estimate for the residence time of fuel molecules inside the flame is obtained by
integrating with respect to radial position the inverse of the average velocity of fuel molecules inside the flame. This
residence time can be shown to scale with D2 [ref. 3J. Therefore, larger droplets have more time for fuel pyrolysis
and soot formation . A large amount of soot formation early in the combustion process of large droplets may
encourage further soot formation by surface reactions on newly-formed soot particles. If the amount of soot formed
is more sensitive to droplet diameter than D2, proportionately more carbon atoms from the vaporized fuel goes into
forming soot for larger droplets than for smaller droplets. This lowers the proportionate amount of heat released for
droplet vaporization and the corresponding burning rate constant.
Methanol and MethanoVfoluene Mixtures
Experimental results of pure methanol droplets showed that methanol droplets produce virtually non-luminous
flames in microgravity at atmospheric pressure [ref. 6]. Pure toluene droplets, however. have been shown to
produce highly sooting flames with the formation of dense soot shells between the droplet and the flame [ref. 1, 5J.
Furthermore, pure methanol droplets exhibit flame extinction, attributed to water vapor absorption into the liquid
phase, and pure toluene droplets have been shown to emit large quantities of soot due to the break-up of the soot
shell near the end of burning. These differences in the behavior of methanol and toluene motivated the study of
mixture droplets of these two fuels [ref. 7] in order to ascertain whether some of the less favorable characteristics of
the spherically symmetric combustion of the pure components could be eliminated. Pure methanol droplets were
burned in the microgravity environment in order to provide a basis for comparison with the mixtures which included
5%,25%. and 50% v/v toluene in methanol.
Pure methanol droplets with Do from 0.40 to 0.45 mm burned with a faint non-luminous flame and exhibited
extinction at droplet diameters ranging from 160 to 190 11m. 5% v/v toluene in methanol droplets, with Do ranging
from 0.5 to 0.6 mm. burned without any observable difference from the pure methanol droplets. The flame did not
appear luminous or exhibit soot formation. Average K values of the 5% toluene droplets before extinction matched
those for pure methanol droplets. and extinction of the 5% toluene droplets consistently occurred at droplet
diameters similar to those of pure methanol droplets. In fact, all toluene/methanol droplets had similar droplet
diameter-squared profiles as shown by the sample in fig. 3 in spite of tremendous differences in flame luminosity
and soot production, demonstrated partly by the photographic sample of the 50% toluene mixture droplet in fig . 4.
Marked increases in the flame luminosity indicating oxidation of soot precursors resulted from the burning of 25%
v/v toluene droplets, with Do between 0.45 and 0.60 mm. The visibility of the flame increased as combustion
proceeded as demonstrated by the two sequences shown in fig. 5. This increase with time may be explained by the
fact that the fractional vaporization of toluene increased as combustion proceeded. Furthermore, the intensity of the
flame luminosity appeared to be sensitive to droplet size as shown in comparing the two sequences in fig . 5.
Nonetheless, the flames for all 25% toluene droplets studied (Do between 0.45 and 0.60 mm) did not produce soot
agglomerates, which suggests that this mixture might be useful in promoting flame luminosity for methanol-based
fuels without soot emissions. However, flame extinction was still observed for this mixture as shown in the
characteristic diameter squared profile of fig. 3. Extinction diameters and burning rate constants before extinction
were again similar to those for pure methanol droplets (- 160 - 180 11m).

333

The 50% v/v toluene mixtures burned with a dramatic increase in soot production to the extent that a dense soot
shell eventually fonned around the droplet and large agglomerates of soot were emitted through the flame near the
end of burning, as in the combustion of pure toluene droplets. However, unlike the combustion of pure toluene
droplets, the mixture droplets (ranging in Do from 0.45 to 0.55 mm) burned with an initial stage of low luminosity,
which suggests an initial period where the fractional vaporization of toluene is low. As methanol is preferentially
removed from the droplet surlace in the early period of combustion, the fractional vaporization of toluene increases
to eventually cause the rapid production of soot particles in the gas phase. demonstrated in the photographs of fig. 4.
The soot particles rapidly agglomerate and form a soot shell around the droplet much like the heptane and
monochloro-octane droplets mentioned above. The collapse of the flame near the end of burning results in the
disruption of the soot shell. The flame extinguishes before the droplet is completely vaporized. The size of the
remaining droplets after the collapse of the flame is clearly smaller « 140 /lm) than the extinction diameter of the
other two methanol/toluene mixtures studied. The differences in the behaviors of the 50% toluene droplets can in
part be explained by vapor/liquid equilibrium data for methanol and toluene which shows that the 50% toluene
mixture lies on the toluene rich side of a negative azeotrope for methanol/toluene mixtures [ref. 7].
Methanol/Dodecanol Mixtures
Adding dodecanol to methanol resulted in different droplet combustion behavior than with adding toluene to
methanol. 25% v/v and 50% v/v dodecanol in methanol mixture droplets were burned in the low-gravity
environment. The following burning characteristics of the methanol/dodecanol mixture droplets, with Do ranging
from 0.50 to 0.60 mm. were observed [ref. 6]: I) droplet burning appeared to be a multi-stage process for both
mixture compositions studied. 2) microexplosions were observed for some of the 25% dodecanol droplets. and 3)
extinction did not occur for the mixtures.
Multi-stage combustion in mixture droplets is characterized by a period midway through combustion when the
droplet diameter remains relatively constant as its temperature rises and the liquid density correspondingly decreases
due to the fractional vaporization of the less volatile component. Such a period is clearly evident in the D2 profiles
for both the 50% v/v and a 25% v/v dodecanol in methanol mixture droplets in fig. 6. Th('. multi-stage combustion
for the methanol/dodecanol droplets is caused by diffusion-controlled vaporization where the more volatile methanol
gradually is depleted at the droplet surface and cannot be replenished fast enough at the surface due to slow liquidphase diffusion. The droplet volume reduction before the intermittent period of heating (e.g .. -25% for the 50%
methanol mixture) leaves some methanol in the droplet interior, and thus in the final stage of combustion both
dodecanol and methanol are being vaporized.
Microexplosions did not occur for the 50% dodecanol droplets burning in microgravity. while microexplosions were
observed for over two thirds of the 25% dodecanol droplets. Microexplosions were characterized by the rapid
formation and expansion of a bubble within the droplet. which eventually bursts as shown in fig. 7. The initiation of
microexplosion is caused by the droplet temperature reaching the superheat limit as discussed in ref. 6.
Methanol/dodecanol mixtures cannot attain temperatures higher than the boiling point of dodecanol during burning.
Therefore. any methanol/dodecanol mixture composition with a superheat limit above the dodecanol boiling point
will not undergo microexplosion. Calculation of methanol/dodecanol mixture superheat limits at one atmosphere
showed that the 50% dodecanol mixture had a superheat limit that was too high for microexplosion while the 25%
dodecanol mixture superheat limit was slightly lower than the dodecanol boiling point [ref. 7]. This sheds light on
the experimental results which showed microexplosion for only two thirds of the 25% dodecanol mixture droplets.
Because the 25% dodecanol mixture has a superheat limit near the boiling point of dodecanol . it is not surprising
that some 25% dodecanol droplets did not exhibit microexplosion.
The addition of dodecanol to methanol was found to suppress extinction exhibited as all the 50% dodecanol and
non-exploding 25% dodecanol mixture droplets appeared to bum to completion. Water absorption within the
droplet may be insignificant during combustion of these mixture droplets because of the higher droplet surface
temperatures and the lower solubility of water in dodecanol.
Conclusions
The microgravity environment has proven a very useful tool in examining different aspects of droplet combustion.
The spherically symmetric droplet flames simplified the interpretation of all of these phenomena because the
interactions between the liquid and the gas-phase were more clearly defined . These aspects included: 1) an
influence of droplet size on soot formation in heptane and monochloro-octane d;oplets. 2) the possibility that

334

increased soot formation and emissions of larger droplets encourage a decrease in the burning rate constant with
initial droplet size for sooting fuels, 3) the usefulness of mixing methanol and toluene to achieve a luminous droplet
flame without soot emissions, 4) microexplosions of methanoVdodecanol mixture droplets, and 5) the potential of
mixing a heavier alcohol (such as dodecanol) with methanol to suppress flame extinction exhibited by pure methanol
droplet. Future work will seek to further quantify the influence of soot on the burning process and to examine a
wide range of fuel mixtures.
References
1. Avedisian. e.T., Yang, J.e.. and Wang, e.H .. "On low gravity droplet combustion", Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A420.

1988. pp. 183-200.
2. Yang, J.e.. An experimental method for studying combustion of an unsupported fuel droplet at reduced gravity,
Ph.D. thesis. Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 1990.
3. Jackson. G.S .. Avedisian, C.T .. and Yang, J.C .. "Observations of Soot during Droplet Combustion at Low
Gravity: Heptane and HeptanelMonochloro-alkane Mixtures" , Int. 1. Heat Mass Trans. 35 (8),1992. pp.
2017-2033.
4. Jackson. G.S. and Avedisian. e.T.. "Experiments on the Effect of Initial Diameter in Spherically Symmetric
Droplet Combustion of Sooting Fuels", Paper no. 93-0130. AIAA 31st Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno.
Nevada. 1993.
5. Jackson. G.S. and Avedisian. e.T., "Possible Effect of Initial Diameter in Spherically Symmetric Combustion of
Sooting Fuels". Paper no. 110. Eastern States Section Meeting of the Combustion Institute. Ithaca. NY.
October. 1991.
6. Yang. J.e.. Jackson. G.S. Avedisian. C.T .• Combustion of unsupported methanol/dodecanol mixture droplets at
low gravity. Twenty-Third Symp . (lilt.) on Comb .. The Combustion Institute. Pittsburgh. 1990, pp. 16191625.
7. Jackson. G.S .. Avedisian. e.T.. and Yang, J.e.. "Soot Formation During Combustion of Unsupported
Methanol!foluene Mixture Droplets in Microgravity". Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A43S, 1991. pp. 359-369.

1.00~

~
0.80

g

C"_

0.60

Cb= 0.66 mm

o

• Cb= 0.48 mm

.~~

...~

·~o

" .....

~~

0.40

......

~

...

~

0.20

. . . . q,

.........

0.00 l--L.JL....I...-.I.....l-L..L..l--L.Jl--L.J-1-L..J.....J...J....J.-L....I.-'-L--L-L-"-'--'-'.............................o.=-................................
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2
.,
tlDo(s/mml
Figure 1. -- Two examples of dimensionless diameter-squared profiles for unsupported heptane droplets
burning in microgravity [ref. 4].

335

Ib= 0.69 mm , unsupported

t = 0.28 s

t =0.14s

t

=OA2 s

t =' 0.56 s

=0.32 s

t

=OA8 s

t = 0.64

Q,= 0.75 mm, supported

t=0.16s

t

s

Figure 2. -- Comparison of unsupported and suspended heptane droplets burning in micrograviry [ref. 4] .
I

1.00

I

I

I

I

~~
~,

0.80

o

I

I

I

I

5% v/v Toluene; Ib= 0.57 mm

• 25% v/v Toluene; Ib= 0.55 mm

'18.

....

~

~

-

o~

C'h

-

-

0.60

-

'"

OAO

-

~

0.20

,~

-

~~

-

O . OO~~I~~~I~~~~I~~I~i~~i~~i~~i~~
I

0.0

0.2

OA

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

~(s/mm2)

lA

1.6

1.8

2.0

Figure 3. -- Dimensionless diameter-squared profiles for two methanol/toluene mixture droplets burning in microgravity [ref. 7J.

t = 0.140 s

t=0.145 s

t=0.150s

t=0.155s

t=0.160 s

Figure 4. --50% v/v toluene in methanol droplet burning at low gravity, exhibiting rapid formation of soot [ref. 7].

336

4,= 0.48 mm

t

=0.08 s

I

=0.16s

t

=0.24 s

t

=0.32 s

1

t =0.04 s

=0.08 s

1=0.16s

t

=0.24 s

t

=0.32 s

[k)= 0.55 mm

1

=0.04 s

Figure 5. -- Comparison of flame luminosity of two 25% v/v toluene in methanol droplets with different initial
diameters burning in microgravity [ref. 7] .

1.00

,~-.--"- ....
"'-,

0.80

~

m

C'h

ff
Q

"lP"

0.60

1:0= 0.57
50% v/v Dodecanol; 1:0= 0.51
25% v/v Dodecanol;

o

•

.....

.~

"l".,-.

~

...

---~~

..~

0.40

...
, .-

"'
~,

m

..

••

'l...,\,:....~

0.20

m

~

q,q,

o. 00

mm

...

'" ...

""'

'-"

mm

•

....

LL..1-LL.LL.L-L.LLL.J....LL.lJ...L~...LL.LL.L..l....J....Ll....l...LL.l'--.L.L~...LL.LLlJ...L.LL..L...L.J

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0 1.2
tlIt Cs/mm2)

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

Figure 6. -- Dimensionless diameter-squared profiles for two methanol/dodecanol droplets burning in microgravity
illustrating multi-staged combustion.

•

•
t

=0.2550 s

t

=0.2575 s

o
t

=0.2600 s

t

=0.2625 s

t

=0.2650 s

Figure 7. -- 75 % v/v methanol in dodecanol droplet burning in microgravity which illustrates microexplosion [ref. 6].

337

SESSION H - FINAL PLENARY SESSION
(Chair, Bradley Carpenter)

Prec ding Page Blank

1-

SESSION SUMMARIES
SUMMARY OF SESSION C - DiIl"usion Flumes and Diagnostics
(Robert Santoro, session chair)
The session o n Diffusi on Flames and Diagnostics contained a balanced treatment of these topical areas in
microgravity research. Four papers were presented on diffusion flames involving both laminar and turbulent
now conditions. These papers were completed by three diagnostic contributions which reviewed present
capabilities as well as previewing future developments.
From the prese ntations in this session some general observations can be drawn regarding both topical areas.
First, turning to the diffusion name studies in microgravity conditions, current work is emphasizing the
measurement a nd prediction of name shape for both laminar and turbulent name conditions. The presence
of soot particles in these names has been used as a key diagnostic tool because the luminous characteristics
of soot particles provide for convenient visualization of the /lame boundary. Consequent Iy, studies are also
focusing o n soot formation effects themselves as a phenom enon of interest. Furthermore, the present results
for these flames ha\·e revealed several interesting effects on soot formation under microgravity conditions,
including what appears to be enha nced formation rates . With respect to the modeling of these !lames.
current models emphasize the prediction of the species concentration, temperature and velocity lields from
which the name boundaries arc obtained and compared with experiments. Because of the lack of diagnostic
techniques suitable to the microgravity experimental facilities (i.e., drop towers, KC-135 !lights and Space
ShUll Ie expe riment s) prediction will continue to be relied upon fur determination of these quantities.
With regard to the area of diagnostics for microgravity studies, the video camera has truly become the
visual ization detector of chqice. The advent of intensified cameras is extending the application of this
technique to low light level$ and holds the promise of providing spectral measurements as well. The
implementation of thermq.phoretic probe sampling of soot panicJcs represents a signilicant advance. The
applicatio n of intrusive p/obes for the measurement of other combustion products would be a major
diagnostic enhancement": Thus, the thermophoretic probe results may spur similar intrusive probe
development [or other measurement needs. It is clear that rapid and signilicant advances have heen made in
the area of combustion diagnostics for microgravity experiments since the First International Microgra\·ity
Combustion Workshop was held.
Turning to the specific presentations made during the session. s~\·cral interest ing and significant results were
presented. I3ahadori et al. re\·iewed their extensive work in the area of laminar and turbulent diffusion !lame
st udies . Of particular note were the turbulent !lames results, which were reported to have significantly
different blowoff, !lame length and vortex development behavior as compared to similar /lames in normal
gravi tyen\·ironments. These re s ults will olTer new challenges to models predicting mixing. ncar-limit
phenomena (e.g. extinction) and !lame stability properties in turbulent !lames.
Faeth et al. reported on studies conducted 011 laminar diffusion !lames, which are oriented towards better
understanding the soot and thermal radiation emissions from luminous !lames. The results presented for low
pressure diffusion names were quite novel. Low pressure conditions were used to simulate microgravity
conditions and revealed new insight in smoke-point behavior and soot formation processes. A major
adva ntage of this low pressure envirOllment is the opportunity for extensive measurements of name
properties over periods of time longer than than typically available in current microgravity facilities. These
experiments hold the potential for providing a unique environment in which to study soot formation and the
development of state relationships aimed at predicting soot formation in turbulent combustion systems.
Atreya et al. reported on their modeling efforts with respect to soot formation in counternow diffusion
names. These modeling results are being compared to recent normal gravity name measurements and \vill
be extended to zero gravity studies to be initiated soon in the NASA-Lewis 2.2 sec microgravity drop tower.
Ku e t al. similarly reported on their efforts to model turbulent !lames in a microgravity ellvirollment in which

341

Preceding Page Blank

soot forma tion is explicitly modeled . Both these studies are incorporating normal gravi ty results for the key
sub models of soot formatio n, tur bulence and radiation. In this respect, they will challe nge curre nt
und erstanding, while presenting new o pportunities to reveal mode ling successes and deficiencies.
The las t three presentatio ns of the sess ion focused on diagnostics for microgravity studi es. Wei land reported
on the current capabi li ties wit h respect to im agi ng and visua lization of Oa mes. Both qualitative and
qua nti tat ive aspects we re d iscussed. Th e application of intensified so lid-state cameras to recent experiments
was discussed and the pote nt ial of these techniques for future drop tower and space-based studies was cle arly
demonstrated. E xtension of soli d-s tate camera capabilit ies into the infrared region was also described.
Finally, developments in the a rea of compact solid-state lasers we re reviewed. Griffin and Green berg
reviewed app lica ti ons of rainbow schlieren dcOectometry and thermophoretic sampling of soot par ticles in
separate microgravity studies. These techniques were demonstrated to have su it able performance in
microgravity experiment al fac ilities such as the NASA-Lewis microgravity d rop towe rs. Bo th of these talks
from the NASA Lewis R esearch Cen te r were clear evidence of the advances made in the past four years with
respect to microgravi ty diagnostics. Finally, Winter described his work on droplet diagnostics a nd reviewed
plans to extend that wo rk to a microgravit y enviro nm e nt, using recently developed compact- laser technology.
This work clearly points to the promising future for diagnostics development for microgravity st udi es.
The session on Diffusion Flames and D iagnost ics provided a su itable overview and summary of microgravity
research in these areas. From thi s sess ion chairman's viewpoin t, it a lso identified some research needs. Insi tu m easurements o f species, tempe rat ure o r de nsi ty und e r m icrogravity conditions would provide critiCally
needed test data for model predicti o ns of these q uan tities. Cu rre nt experimen ts rely heavily on models to
provide th ese propert ies and comparat ive res ults do not presently exist aga inst whi ch to \'al idate models.
St ud ies of finite rate chemistry effects have not yet been pursued. [n fact, studies th at di ffe rentiate between
soot and Oa m e chemistry effect s a re absent. Presently, soot is a key diagnostic tool for the stu dy of nam e
st ru cture. Direct m easureme nts of co mbu sti o n speeies such as OH o r CO would yield further in sights into
Oa me str ucture unde r mi crogravity con diti o ns. A ll o f these needs appear to be in th e mix of future studies
and, with proper deve lop men t of diagnostics capabilities, we can look fo rward to stimul ati ng prescntations o n
these to pics in future microgravi ty co mbust io n workshops.
SUl\H"IARY OF SESSION D - Premixed Flames
(Mi tche ll Smooke, sessio n chair)
The Wedncsday a ft e rn oo n sess ion on pre mixed names co nsi ste d of e ight presentations. [\'! ost o f th e talks
we re expe rimen ta l in focus, th o ugh two were computational a nd th eore ti ca l in orientation. a nd o ne was
en tire ly com put a ti ona l. Th e presen tatio ns ranged from studies of pre mixed laminar an d tur bul e nt n a mes in
microgravity co nditio ns, to combustion of particles an d dust- clou d suspensio ns, to th e comb usti o n synthes is of
ce rami c co mpos it es. Each of th e eight ta lk s is di scussed in so me de ta il below.
The presentation by Pa ul Ronn cy (Pri nce to n University) considered combustion limit s in pre m ixed /l a mes in
microgravity. H e examined th e effects of radiation o n th ese syste ms as well as th e st ructure an d sta bility of
these /l ames at low Lewis numbers. His wo rk also co nsidered n ame propagation in cylindri cal tubes a nd the
simulation of combustion via aut ocata lytic che mica l reacti o ns.
J o hn Buckmaster's (U niversit y of Ill inois) present ation focused on the ana lytical and num er iea l m ode ling of
configurations und ergoing experi menla l study in NASA's microgravity combustion program. The m ajor areas
of study were /lame balls, particle cloud names a nd self ext ingu ishing names.
Research of K. Kailasanath (N RL) and G. Patnaik's (Berkeley Research Associates) investigates
computationally concerns the propagation and extinctio n of gas-phase flames in both microgravity and Earth
e nvironments . They comput ed tim e-depende nt multidim ensional n ames that propagated downward. They
a nalyzed a chem ical kinetics instability issue fo r rich hydroge n-air names a nd th ey studied thermod iffusive
and b uoyancy inte ractio ns.

342

The work by Eng, Zhu, and Law (Princeton University) combined experimental and theoretical analyses of
cylindrical and spherical premixed and non premixed flames in microgravity. The premixed work focused on
stabi lization issues and the measurement of the laminar flame speed. The nonpremixed work examined
extinction and soot layer properties in the inner flame region.
Researchers at LBL (Kostiuk, Zhou, and Cheng) used moderate-to-low turbulence Reynolds number flames
(wrinkled) to characterize and quantify turbulent flame structure under microgravity. Qualitative and
quantitative flow visualization techniques were coupled with video recording and computer-controlled image
analysis.
The research group at McGill University (Lee. Peraldi, and Knystautas) is examining microgravity
combustion of dust suspensions. They have carried out a number of studies aboard the KC-135 and the ESA
Caravelle. Preliminary experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of obtaining a quiescent dust cloud for
fundamental flame propagation studies in microgravity.
A combined theoretical and numerical study of particle cloud premixed flames was undertaken by Seshadri at
UCSD. The work provided a description of the structure of planar laminar names propagating a medium
contai ning a uniform cloud of fuel particles premixed with air.
The final presentation of the afternoon was by \Ioore. Feng and Hunter (Colorado Center for Advanced
Ceramics) and Wirth (Coors Ceramics Company). An experimental program in self-propagating high
temperature synthesis (S HS) was described in which several model composite systems were investigated.
The work has the potential of impacting catalyst support systems, filters, and ultra-light ~tructural materials.
Due to the length and the number of talks, the session ended close to 6 P.M., so there was not time for a
ge neral wrap-up discussion in which outstanding problems, issues and concerns of the researchers could be
voiced . Overall. the talks were wcll received and we look forward to the next round of results .
SUJ\l;\lARY OF SESSION F - Ignition, Smolder. and Flame Spl'ead of Condensed Phase Fuels
(Raymond Friedman. sessio n chair)
The scssion consisted of seven presentations. The in\'estigators were from 10 organizations. Each
presentation included so me discussion or at least mention of a mathematical model of the combustioll
phenomenon of interes!. as wcll as rderences to experimental results. The papers dealt with ignition, flame
spread. and in some cases, extinction for a wide var iety of condensed-phase combustibles: (I) thin paper; (2)
thermally thick polymethyl metha crylate; (3) flexible polyurethane foam; (4) flammable liquids (mcthanol,
butanol. decane); and (5) metal s (im n. steel. titaniulll. copper, aluminum, nickel, Monel. tungsten). Other
variables were gravitationa l field, tOlal pressure. partial pressure of oxygen, incident thermal radiation,
app roach flow velocity, and sample thickness. In each study, the goal is to establish the physico-chemical
mechanism by which the ignition and propagation occur, both at normal gravity and at microgravity. In no
case was it possible to draw !inal conclusions, but it was clear that progress is occurring in each of these
ongoing investigations.
From an experimental point of view, certain things emerged: (1) it is indeed possible to perform good
microgravity combustion experiments with condensed-phased materials; there are clearly observable
differences from normal-gravity combustion, (2) there would be a great advantage in having higher-resolution
non-intrusive instrumentation, and (3) much more experimental data will be needed before firm conclusions
on mechanisms can be established. As for the theoretical side, the most advanced models presented were
those of Kashiwagi and Baum (ignition and spread); Tien et al. (steady spread limits) , and Sirignano et al.
(unsteady spread with circulation in both liquid and gas). All these models will require further development
(three-dimensionality, better chemical kinetic representation, inclusion of gaseous radiation, effect of
dilucnts).
Ultimately, we look forward to the convergence of the experimental and theorel1cal work .

343

SUMI\IARY OF SESSION G - Droplet and Spray Combustion
(Forman Williams, session chair)
This proved to be a lively session involving a considerable number of new resea rch results, especially
concerning droplet combustion. Different studies of droplet burning focused on different fuels, including
heptane, decane, methanol, heptane-hexadecane mixtures and (in work reporte d orally) methanol-dodecanol
and methanol-toluene mixtures as well. The oxidizing atmospheres were mainly norm al air, air diluted with
nitrogen, or air enriched with oxygen. Very broad pressure ranges, from 0.1 atm to 100 atm, were
considered in different investigations. In addition to these single-droplet studies, the re were two reports of
preliminary results on burning of droplet arrays and one outlining investigations of counterflow spray
combustion.
An area of emphasis in droplet combustion concerned the burning of single-component and two-component
fuels at elevated pressures, extending beyond the critical pressures of the fuels, co nfirming the increase in the
burning-rate constant with increasing pressure, up to the critical pressure. The burning-rute consta nt
achieves a maximum at or above the critical pressure, with the maximum occurring a t higher pressures for
lower peak temperatures, as found in burning in diluted atm osphe res o r, in extreme cases. in vapo riza ti on
without burning. This behavior is cxplicable on the basis of the re duced partial pressure of the fuel in the
gas at the droplet surface under conditions of reduced partial pressure of the fuel in the gas at the droplet
surface under conditio ns of reduced peak tempe ratures and correspondingly reduced burning rates.
The question of whether three-stage combustion of two-component fuels extends to supercritical pressures
could not be addressed in ground-based experi ments employing fiber-supported droplets. because the
droplets fall off the fiber as the critical point is app roached, due to the reduced surface tensions .
ficrogravity investigations have now demonstrated that three-stage behavior docs indeed extend to
supercritical conditions. Preliminary explanati ons of the new res ults were offered in terms of buildup of
surface layers of different compositio n through fuel diffusion effects.
O ther results, indicated as having been obtained since th e previous workshop, included the obse rvation of the
slow regime of heptane combustion, encountered for near-spherical burning with weak ignitions, and th e
demonstration of a decreasing burning-rat e constan t for methanol with increasing time, as a consequence of
absorption, within the liquid fuel, of water produced in the flame. A number of new observations of sooting
phenomena. Droplet disruption events during combustion also were reported, further emphasizing
re lationships between sooting and disruption .
Studies directed towards !lame extinctio n helped to clarify extinction conditions in tlmplet burning for
methanol and for a lkanes. [n particular, significant uncertainties in important alkane fuel chemistry were
identified , which can result in differences of two orders of magnitude in predictetl heptane droplet extincti on
diameters. Experiments are bei ng tlesigncd to measure the extincti on diameters under microgra\·ity
co ntliti ons, to help reduce the unce rtainties in the predictions.
The two studies of droplet arrays involve two o r three fiber-supported droplets, side by side, burning in
chambers in drop towers. One stutly is directed towartls normal pressures and the other towartls twocomponent fuels at e levate d pressures. Both are directed towards obtaining information that can be used in
describing influences of droplet interactions in spray combustion, a nd both are just beginning. So scientific
conclusions have not been drawn, although useful observations have been made o n ways to make droplet
arrays bu rn symmetrically.
The investigation of counterflow sprays employed elect rostatica lly-formed sprays and demonstrated
combustion-zone structures in th e counterflow configuration and how th ose structures can depend o n initial
droplet-size distributions. The role of microgravity in this investigation was indicated as involving possible
reaction-zone displacement through buoyancy effects and group-combustion phenomena that may occur at
higher droplet number densities.

344

Most of the droplet-burning investigations have been perform ed employing drop-tower facilities. Drop
towers are considered to be well-suited to many droplet-combustion st ud ies, because the burning times often
are compatible wi th such facilities, and the low g-lcvels required are ach ievable therein. For conditions
under which longer burning times occur, the H okkaido lO-secono tower is a very all ractive facility. especially
si nce it s gentle r deceleration admits use of more advanced instrumentation, whic h often is more sensitive to
rapid deceleration. The g-levels in ai rcraft typically are high enough to produce some degraoation in dropletburni ng results. One investigation is directed towards experiments in the Space ShUll Ie for conoilions
involving burning times too long for drop towers. In anoth er, an ESA project, there arc plans to employ a
sounding rocket. It will be interesting to see what facilities res ult in the most useful droplet-combustion data.
In what directions might future new investigations best proceed? It was suggested that new emphasis might
be placed on burning in atmospheres having high or low oxygen concentrations, on burning in atmospheres
having high or low oxygen concentrations, on burning in atmospheres having inert s other than nilrogens, and
on burning more exotic fuels, such as monopropellants or liquio metals. These seemcU to be topics for
wh ich unknowns are relatively g reat.
A final question concerned types of instrumentation fo r use in microgravity studies of droplet and spray
combustion . .\lost previo us work has involved mainl y mOli on-picture photography. Recenl ust: has been
made of ultra\·iolet filte rs to isolate OH radiati on emission, and a project directed towards de\·elnpment of
laser instrumentation has been initi ated. It see med to he felt to be highly oesirable to explore further ma ny
new instrumentation app roaches for such microgra vity studi es, but without discontinuing the photngraphic
methods that to date have proyided virtu a lly all of the useful experimental information ohtained under
microgravity conditions for dropl e t combustio n.

345

OPEN DISCUSS10N
Questi on (Jack Salzman, NASA Lewis R esearch Center): Were liquid phase dynami cs (e.g., int L: rn a l droplet
nows) discussed? Cou ld thi s be an important area of resea rch ?
An swer: (Fo rm a n Williams, U. of Ca liforni a, San Diego) Yes, thue was di sc uss ion of liqlJid-ph ";''; dynamics,
for example in connection with Professor Dryer's present ati on. I ncglected to me nti o n th at in n1l· summary.
It certa inly cou ld be un important area of research because th e ru les of ph e no me na such as Mar:,go ni now,
for example, in droplet and spray co mbusti on are poorly und e rstood.
Question (Jo hn Moore, Colorado School of Mines)
The combustion science resea rch community now has an id ea l op portunit y to embra ce a new and.h.igb!y
logi ca l research area of the svnth etics of advanced materials in favorabl e combustion tec hn ology.
(1) Need: more resea rch on th e potenti al of coupling co mbust inn synth es is a nd mi erogr'l\'it y tn produce new
and uniqu e advanced materi als. Th e will co mpl ement and aid th e Fede ral government's new resca rch
directive in Advanced Materi als and Process ing Program (AM PP)
(2) In particul ar: need to co nduct resea rch on:
(a) Synergistic crfects of th e coupling of combustion synthes is with microgravity and liquid a nd /l l ," g<lseous
(nuid) ph ase transport (i. e., delibera tely generating liquids a nd /or gases at th e co mbu stio n point 10 aid in th e
synth esis kinetics and provid e new and /o r uniqu e microstructure and morph ologies with impro\·cd pro pe rti es
(e.g., in- situ synthesis of composites; whiskers; fine and ultrafin e powders; foa med (cxpamled) cera mi cs;
dense nea r net-shape ce ra mi c and metal m<l trix composites.
(b) Mode ling of the above advanced combustion synth es is processes to hi gh synth esis p"ral1leter~ (e.g.,
particl e size, green densit y, stoichi ometry, ph ysico-che mical prope rti es of reacta nt s and pr oduct s. ignition and
co mbu sti on te mpe ratures, etc, which provid e co ntrol of th e co mbusti on synth es is an d predict prnd uct
microstructure and pro pert ies.
(c) oth e r areas (e.g., nam e synth esis of powde rs, including composite powders), whi skers a nd fille rs and
Fullerenes. etc.
Answer (Brad Ca rpe nt er, ASA H eadquarters): So noted, a nd we will cert ainl y take th at into co nsid eration
when pre paring th e scope of th e next NRA .

346

1-

COLOR PLATES

receding Page Blank
I

_ __ _ _ --- ___ J

VJ
.j:>.

\0

Oxygen Ambient

Ni tro ge n Ambient
Nitrogen Ambi ent
,

"~",,-.~ :-/-::··;'~··":?;.i~?-"'"

,..
-.-

,

'-'.

0.... ~
"'tJ _.
~~

-:s

iii" 5'
OJ .....

S'Cl)
S-CD
....

-;;
";j
I

;'!.;i!.

.,.~~~ t,.i

'.

_:~~,,'~~.Jr\'" .~. ~ !,;: .... ~~

•

Fig. 1 Measurement of internal circulation from within
droplet
droplets using fluorescence quenching.

(")
g>
o

0
(")

-

O x y gen/Nit r o g en
Oxy gen/Nitrogen

"

Winter

Color Plate C-7b

351

Preceding Page Blank

I

.- '

;;:

::
~

...
... c...:
o~

-

r-

0-

:r.

E
0
0

0

-c

M

Kailasanath
Color Plate D-3
353

Preceding Page Blank

---------

-~---- -

~

-~-

~

l

l

I

Fig. 2a. Low strain rate, sooty counterflow diffusion
flame on the oxidizer side of the stagnation plane

VJ

TiCl
Fig. 2b. Same as Fig. 2a. The T iCl4 streak shows the
location of the stagnation plane

Fig. 3a. Low strain rate, sooty counterflow diffusion
flame on the fuel side of the stagnation plane

Fig. 3b. Same as Fig. 3a. The TiCl4 streak shows the
show
location of the stagnation plane

VI
VI

-c
"tJ
..,
-"'
ro
CD

n

ro
CD
a.
0-

:J
::J
lO
to
-C
"tJ
OJ
lO
to

ro

OJ
OJ
:J
::J
A
A

n

(")

- ,..
o »
...
..,3!@
3! '<3
Ci
0)
0)'<
S'1l)
S"Q)
0
Q.

n

(")

w

3.5 s

4.0 s

Fig. 1.

9.1 s

8.4 s

16.5 s

16.3 s

21.9s

25.4 s

Four frames from 16 mm film of flame spread over ashless filter paper in
the SSCE at 50% 02 at 1.5 atm (top) and 1.0 atm (bottom). Times are
time from the first appearance of a flame-like image on the film.

Altenkirch
Color Plate F-2
357

Preceding Page Blank

----~--~ ----- -------------- ---- ,

15%

18%

25%

1/10th g

1/6th g

Fig. 7 Downward Spreading in 15% Oxygen, 1 Atm
Flame Shapes at Scm/sec
Relative Concurrent Flow

a)

(c)

(b)

Fig. 8 Upward Spreading in 15% Oxygen, ] atm (a,b), 0.5 atm (c,d)

T'ien
Color Plate F~

359

Preceding Page Blank

- --

._-- -

..

_-- .. _-

FIGURE 1: RSD Visualization of a butanol-air name at 23 C. Fl ame spreads from left to right. The pool depth is 1 em.

FIG RE 2: PlY of a butanol-air name at 23 C. Flame spread is from right to left. Time lapse is 0.33 sec. Pool depth
the l1eld of vic ~r,·~ picture is different than that of Figure 1.

• •I

r

1 em; note that

Y=4 mm

llim~~~~~~~ y = O
r = 20 mm

=0

IS

r

=0

r = 20 mm

Figure 3 .-Flow pattern and flame st ruc~ure for one fl am e pulsation at normal gravity . In
(d)- (f), the recirculation cell structure in front of the flame leading edg e is destroyed during
the premixed burning portion of the flame . Hot gas expansion opposes the flow of fre sh
oxygen to the reaction zone, and the flame moves backwards (as if it w ere being extinguished). The gas expansiory rate decreases after the flame propagates through the pre mixed region , and, subsequently, the buoyant forces recover to provide fresh o xyg en to
the reaction zone .

361

Ross

Col Pla e F-5
Prece d " Page Ian
Ing

2.0 . . . - - - - -- - ...-.-.-.0-.------O-~-o-h-e-xa-d-e-c-an-e-.,
.
.
-0- - -A --

20 % hexadecane
40 % hexadecane
_._.--6-._.
60 % hexadecane

.6t •.o.A

U: '.fj,

.'.'6

. .....

·-lth

0.5 ... 0.-. 0 ............ ,

o ' ..c(" ...

...

- .....
0 ···' 0 . - ... .....
""0 ·_.-'"

..
.
O0 +----r----,---~l::;.-:::.Q...~~-~----l

0.0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time from Ignition Spark (sec)

1.2

Figure 1.--Plots of squares of measured droplet diameters vs . time.

0.794 sec

0.860 sec

0.990 sec

Figure 2.--Sequence of images showing flame contraction and growth for a droplet composed initially of 20% n-hexadecane
and 80% n-heptane. Times are after the ignition spark. Visible flame diameters (measured perpendicular to the fiber) for
this droplet are plotted in Fig. 3.

Shaw
Color Plate G2A

363

Preceding Page Blank

(--

N
<

~

,....,.

30 01
<

2.0

;=l
I-

~

~

1.5

00.0

I-

:>

\~

a
~

.........

'0

~

0
....

~

pOOOO

c:
.........

20

\

0
C)

0..

E

0

l-

0

'0

0.5

C)

20% hexadecane
80% heptane

a
~

v 0.0

C/1

~

@

a

1.0

9
C)

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

~

10 [L

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

'0
(\)

a
0

0.0 0.2

0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Time After Ignition Spark ( ec)

~

0'

C/1

Figure 4.--Image of a droplet (initially 60%
n-hexadecane and 40% n-heplane) showing
the support fiber and the Sool "shell" .
1ne droplet diameter is about I 07 mm .

Figure 3.--1'1015 of squares of droplet and flame
diameters for a droplet composed initially of
20% n-hexadecane and 80% n-heptane .

0.324 sec

0 .333 sec

0 .342 sec

Figure 5.--Sequence of images showing the flame behavior just prior 10, during and after what appears 10 be disruption of a
droplet initially composed only of n-heptane. Times are after the ignition spark. For a scale reference, the visible
flame diameter at 0.324 sec is about 4.7 ffiJn (measured perpendicular to the fiber) .

Shaw
Color Plate G2b

Preceding Page Blank
365

I

50
z

L

40

_{ ll j l! {o
i

2000

•

•

1800

•
o

•
0

0

0

•
o·

6

630
0

1400
o·

H! H!r

,.-...

1600

~

1200 >-3

o·
o.

1000B

o·

800

c LS
oLS

20
•

600

• ill

0

• l-B

0

400

0 .

10

0 . 0 . 0 • 0 •

200
- N2

N2 -

o

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

z (mm)
Fig. 3

CounteDow spray diffu ion fl ame bumer.

Fig. 4

Average droplet diameter (squares) and gas-phase
temperature (circles) measured along the burner ax.i
ver us distance from the bottom burner rim .

57

•••

43

1/1

"
§

29

8
14

o
19

39

DiAmeter um.

Fig . 5

Fig. 6

Microphotograph of a droplet in the act of
disintegrating.

Droplet size di tribution measured at z=5.5 mm
in Flame LS .

Gomez
Color Plate G-6
367

Preceding Page B'an~

LIST OF ATTENDEES

Preceding Page Blank

J

SECOND INTERNATIONAL
MICROGRAVI1Y COMBUSTION
WORKSHOP
September 15-17, 1992

AITENDE E LIST
Suresh Aggarwal
Univ. of Illinois at Chicago
Mechanical Engineering
Box 4348
Chicago, IL 60680
312-996-2235

Thomas Avedisian
Cornell University
Department of Mechanical & Aero Engr.
Upson Hall Room 112
Ithaca, NY 14853-7501
607-255-5105

Sanjay Agrawal
\Iichigan State Universi ty
Department of Mechanical Engineering
E.lst Lansing, M I 48824
517-353-9950

Richard Axelbaum
Washington University
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
St. Louis, MO 63130
314-935-7560

Ajay Agrawal
Clemson University
Mechanical Engineering Depart ment
318 Riggs Hall
Clemson, SC 29631
203-656-5643

Yousef Bahadori
Science Applications International Corp.
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
216-433-8574

Robert Altenkirch
\Iississippi State University
P.O. Drawer DE
\Iississippi State. l\IS 3')762
1l0 l-325-2270

Kirk Barrow
let PropUlsion Laboratory
M.S. 301-375
4800 Oak Grove Dr.
Pasadena. CA 91109
.q 18-354-0345

C'; eorge A roslOlakis

L'niversity of California. Los Angclc.:s
\fech. Aerospace & Nu clear Engr. Dcrt.
38-137 Engineering IV
Los Angeles. CA 90024-1597
213-825-1300

Howard Baum
NIST
Building 22.t, Room B268
Gaithersburg, M D 20899
301-975-6668

Arvind Atreya
Michigan State University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
A-104 RCE
East Lansing, MI 48824
517-353-6356

Barney Bellagh
ADF, Inc.
3003 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-977-0375

Preceding Page Blan~
371

Subrata Bhauacharjee
San Diego State University
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
San Diego, CA 92182
619-59+'6080

Christian Chauveau
CNRS-CRCCHT
1C, Av. Recherche Scientifique
45071 ORLEANS Cedex 2

FRANCE,
3338515485

Nora Boualo
AnaJex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park. OH 44142
216-977 ·0086

Gung Chen
Yale University
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
P.O. Box 2159, Yale Station
New Haven, cr 06520
203-432-4390

Melvyn Branch
University of Colorado, Boulder
Mechanical Engineering
Boulder. CO 80309-0427
303-492-6318

Robert Cheng
University of California
1 Cyclotron Rd.
B29C
Berkeley, CA 94720
415-486-5438

Kenneth Brezinsky
PrincelOn University
E. Quad D329
PrincelOn. l"J 08544
009-258-5225

Daniel Dietrich
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
216-433-8759

John Buckmasler
University of Illinois
Aero &: Astro Engr.
104 S. \talhews Ave
Urbana. IL 61801-2007
217-333- 1803

James Driscoll
University of Michigan
312 Aerospace Engineering Bldg.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Dan Bulzan
NASA Lewis Research Ccnrer
21000 Brookpark Rd .
Cleveland.OH 44 135
21(j-433-58·+8

Frederick Drver
Princeton Universilv
C-316 Engineering OU;.ldrangle
Princeton. NJ nS54-+
609-987-2916

Brad Carpcnrer
NASA Headquarters
Code SNB
WashinglOn. DC 20546
202-358-0818

Cory Dunsky
Sandia National Labs
Combustion Research FaciliLY
P.O. Box 969, Division 8362
Livermore, CA 94551-0969
510-294-1005

[van Calton
UniversilY of California, Los Angeles
Mech. Aerospace & Nuclear Engr.
48-121 Engineering IV
Los Angeles. CA 90024-1597
310-825-5320

Ray Edelman
Rockwell International Corporation
23146 Cumorah Crest Drive
Woodland Hills, CA 91364
805-371-7196

Dee Chapman
Boeing
P.O. Box 2.tOOO2
Huntsville. AL 35824

372

S. Elghobashi
University of California
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Irvine, CA 92717
714-856-6131

A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Berkeley, CA 94720
415-642-6554

James Eng
Princeton University
Dept. of Mech. & Aero. Engr.
Princeton. NJ 08544
609-258-5649

Patrick Finnegan
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-977-0188

Ofodike Ezekoye
NIST
B-258, Building 224
Building & Fire Research Lab.
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
301-975-2593

Michael Frenklach
Penn State University
202 Academic Projects Bldg.
University Park, PA 16802
816-865-4392

Gerard Faeth
University of Michigan
218 Aerospace Engineering Building
Ann Arbor. MI 48109-21.fO
313-764-7202

Robert Friedman
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. 0 H 44135
216-433-5697

Bakhtier Farouk
Drexel University
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Philadelphia. PA 19104
215-895-2237

Raymond Friedman
Factory Mutual Research
1151 Boston-Providence Turnpike
Norwood. MA 02062
617-762-4300

Patrick Farrell
U niversit y of Wisconsin. ~ fadison
Department of ~Iechanical Engineering
1500 Johnson Dr ive
~ladis()n. WI 5370fi
(,OS-2(,)·I(,K(,

Osamu Fujita
Hokkaido University
Dept. Mechanical Engineering
Sapporo. Hokkaido. OW JAPAN
Tony C;alambos
Analex
30DI Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-977-0144

Francis Fcndell
TRW
R1/1062
One Space Park
Redondo Beach. CA 90025
310-812-0327

George Gogos
Rutgers University
Dept. of Mech. & Aero. Engr.
P.O. Box 909
Piscataway, NJ 08855
908-932-3797

Paul Ferkul
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21!XXJ Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 4-H35
216-433-8107

Iskender Gokalp
C.N.R.S. -LCSR
1 C, av de la Recherche Scientifique
45071 Orleans Cedex 2
France

373

Suleyman Gokoglu
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 106-1
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 44135
216-433-5499

Mark Guenther
Michigan State University
1637 Lake Dr. Apt. 80
Haslen, MI 48840
George Haddad
NASA Lewis Research Center
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
216-433-2714

Jeffrey S. Goldmeer
Case Western Reserve University
Department of Mech. & Aero. Engr.
Cleveland, OH 44106
216-791-8555

John Haggard
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.s. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 44135
216-433-2832

Alessandro Gomez
Yale University
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
P.O. Box 2159
New Haven. cr 06520
203-432-4384

Bert Hansen
NASA Headquarters
Code SN
Washington, DC 20546
202-358-0818

Jay Gore
University of Maryland
School of Mechanical Engineering
2177F Engineering Building
College Park. M D 27907

William Hartz
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-433-0084

317-494-1~52

Samuel Goroshin
438 90th Street Apt. #3B
Brooklyn, NY 11209
718-921-1504

Mohammad Hassani
The University of Michigan
College of Engineerin g
Department of Mcch. Engr. & Appl. Mech.
Ann Arbor. MI ~~109-2121
313-7(j7-3588

Helen Gra nt
NASA Headquarters
Code SNC
300 E Street SW
Washinl.!lnn. DC :::05-Ui
202-358-rni25

Uday Hegde
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
2001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-433-8744

Paul Greenberg
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland.OH 4-H35
216-433-3621

Warren Hodges
NASA Headquarters
Code SN
Washington, DC 20546
202-453-1741

DeVon Griffin
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 44135
216-433-8109

Jack Howard
MIT
Room 66-454
Cambridge, MA 02139
617-253-4574

374

- I

K Kailasanath

Thomas Hunter
Penn State University
Mechanical Engineering Department
310 Reber Bldg.
University Park, PA 16802
814-863-2945

Naval Research Laboratory
Code 4410
Lab for Computational Physics
Washington, DC 20375-5000
202-767-2402

Soon Muk Hwang
NASA Lewis Research Center
~LS.

Takashi Kashiwagi
National Institute of Standards and Tech
Center for Fire Research
B258/224
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
301-975-6699

5-11

21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland.OH 44135
216-433-6504

Larry Kostiuk

Farrokh Issacci
University of California, Los Angeles

Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
MS-B29C 1 Cyclotron Road
Berkeley, CA 94720
510-486-6683

MANE
Los Angeles. CA 90024-1597
310-206-4848
Greg Jackson
Corneil University
Upson Hall Box 34
Ithaca. NY 14353
007-255-9109

John Koudelka
NASA Lewis Research Center
M .S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
215-433-2852

Dick Jacobs
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park. OH 44142

Jerry Ku
Wayne State University
Mechanical Engineering Department
Detroit, MI 48202
313-577-3814

Dwight Janoff
Lockheed ESC
2-lOO NASA 1 1\1S B22
Houston. TX 77058
-13-333-W72

Ming-Chi Lai
Wayne State University
Mechanical Engineering DL:partmcnt
2129 Engil1l':l.:ring Building
Detroit. 1\.1 I 4X202
313-577-3893

Hang Jia

Rurgers University
Dep!. of Mechanical & Aerospace Engr.
P.O. Box 909
Piscataway, NJ 08855
908-932-3674

Chung K. Law
PrinceLOn University
Department of Mech. & Aero.
Engineering Quadrangle
PrinceLOn, NJ 08544
609-452-5271

Stan Jones
University of California, Los Angeles
\1ANE
33-137 Engineering IV
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1597
.310-825 -1300

Paul Ledoux
McDonnell Douglas
16055 Space Center Blvd .
HousLOn, TX 77062
713-335-4133

375

John Lee
McGill University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
817 Sherbrooke St. W.
Montreal Quebec H3A 2K6 CANADA
514-398-6301

Clayton Meyers
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 86-15
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
216-433-3882

Jack Lekan
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
216-433-3459 .

K. Clark Midkiff
University of Alabama
Department of Mechanical Engr.
Box 870276
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0276
205-348-1645

Gregory Linteris
NIST
Bldg. 224. Room A345
Gaithersburg, hiD 20899

Masato Mikami
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo 113, JAPAN

301-975-22B3
Fletcher Mille r
NASA Lewis Research Center
~I. S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland.OH 44135
216-433-8845

David Lozinski
Universilv of Ill. Urbana-Champagne
Dept. of Aero & Astro Engr.
Urbana. lL 61810
217-2+l-4372
Bernard Matkowsky
Northweslern U niversilY
The Technological Institute
Dept. of Engr. Sci. & Appl. Math
Evanslon. IL 60208
708-491-5396

Moti Mittal
Ohio Supercomputer Center
1224 Kinnear Rd.
Columbus, OH 43212
0 14-292-2552
Jo hn i\loore
Colorado School o r Mines
Dept. of Metallurgical and M al. Engr.
( jolden. C O RO-Ull

Carl t\ lcade
NASA Joh nso n Space Center
AstronaUl 's Office
!iouston. TX - - ll5R

':'U3-273-3no

C. M . Megariciis
Univ. of Illinois at Chicago
Mech. Engr.
M/C 251 Box 4348
Chicago. IL 60680
312-996- 3436

Dan lvlori lak
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-322
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
Edward M ularz
NASA Lewis Research Center
MIS 5-11
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
216-433-5850

A.M. Mellor
Vanderbilt University
Box 1592. Station B
Nashville. TN 37235-1592
615-343-6214

376

Vedha Nayagam
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-9n-0139

Howard Pearlman
NASA Lewis Research Center
21()()() Brookpark Rd_
Cleveland.OH 44135
Robert Pitz
Vanderbilt University
Mechanical Engineering
Box 54. Station B
Nashville, TN 37205
615-322-0209

Sandra Olson
NASA Lewis Research Ccnter
M.S. 500-217
21()()() Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 4-l135
216-433-2859

Joseph Powers
University of Notre Dame
Dept. of Aero. & Mech. Engr-.
Notre Dame. IN 46556

Howard Palmer
Penn State University
224 Academic Proj. Bldg.
University Park, PA 16802

219-239-5978

Joseph Prahl
Case Western Reserve University
Dept. t\lech. & Aero. Engr.
Cleveland. 0 H 44106

Mary Palumbo
:'-IASA Lcwis Rcsearch Center
M.S. 86-12
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. 0 H 4-+ 135
216-433-20-B

216-368-2941

Alden Presler
Analex
3005 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park. OH 4-H42
216-977-0194

Gopal Patnaik
Berkley Research Associatcs
P.O. Box 852
Springfield. VA 22150
202-767-3531

Ishwar Puri
University of Illinois at Chicago
Dept. of tech . Engr.
M/C 251. Bux 4348
Chicago. I L W()80

Mark Paul
University of California. LllS Angeles
MANE
38-137 Engineering I V
Los Anl!eles. eA l}()024- 151)7
31O-H25 - U()()

312-413-7560

Martv Rabinowitz
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 5- 11
21000 Brookpark Rd .
Cleveland, OH 44135
216-433-5847

Todd Paulos
University of California. LllS Angcles
MANE
38-137 Engineering IV
Los Angeles. CA 90024-1597
310-825-1300

Surya Raghu
State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook
Departmenc of Mechanical Engineering
Stony Brook. NY 11794-2300
516-632-8343

Kevin Paxton
University of California
MANE
38-137 Engineering IV
Los Angeles. CA 90024-1597
310-825-1300

377

Anjay Ray
Michigan State University
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Combustion/Heat Transfer Lab
East Lansing, MI 48824
517-353-9950

Jun'ichi Sato
IHI Research Institute
3-1-15 Toyosu, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135
JAPAN,
813-534-3360
David Schiller
University of California, Irvine
945 Engineering Building
Irvine, CA 92717
714-856-7160

D.R. Reddy
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 5-11
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
216-433-8133

James Seaba
University of Missouri - Columbia
1020 EBE, ?vIAE Department
Columbia, MO 65211
314-882-3655

Robert Rhome
NASA Headquarters
Code SN
Washington, DC 20546
202-453-1425

K. Seshadri
University of California at San Diego
Dept. AMES
Mail Code B·OlO
La J olla. CA 92093-0310
619-534-4876

Paul Ronnev
Princeton U niversit v
The Engineering Quadrangle
Princeton, NJ 08544
609-452·5278

Ben Shaw
University of California at Davis
MAME Department
Davis, CA 95616
916-752·4130

Howard Ross
NASA Lewis Research Cenler
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, OH 4-H35

Naney Shaw
NASA Lewis Resea rch C e nl e r
M.S. 500-2OS
21000 Brookpark Rd .
Cleveland. 0 H .f.f 135
21G-·rn-32S5

Kurt S;lcksleder
NASA Lewis Research Ce nler
M .S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Ru .
Ckvebnu.OI-l .f4 135
216-433-2857

Martin Sichel
University of Michigan
Dept. of Aerospace Engr.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2140
313-764-3388

Jack Salzman
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-205
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 44135
216-433-2868

Joel Silver
Southwest Sciences, Inc.
1570 Pacheco Sl.. E·11
Santa Fe, NM 87501
505-984-1322

Robert Santoro
The Pennsylvania Slate Universil Y
Department of Mechanical Engineering
240 Research Building E
University Park, PA 16802-2320
814-863-1285

378

Y.R. Sivathanu
Purdue University
School of Mechanical Engr.
125 Chafee Hal~ TSPC Sch. of Mech. E ngr.
W. Layfayette, IN 47907
317-494-9364

Tesfahunet Teele
NASA Lewis Research Center
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
216-433-6620
Larry Torre
Boeing
P.O. Box 240002, MS JC-26
Huntsville, AL 35824
205-461-3516

Mitchell Smooke
Yale University
New Haven, cr
203-432-4344
Mark Stack
Bradley University
1539 California St.
Elk Grove, IL 60007

Paul Trimarchi
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.s. 86-12
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, OH 44135
216-433-3824

708-529-7877

Theodore Steinberg
Lockheed - ESC
P.O. Drawer MM
Las Cruces. NM 88004
505-524-5680

David Urban
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland,OH 44135
216-433-2835

Russ Slienbach
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142

Randy Vander Wal
Sverdrup Technology, Inc.
2001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park. OH 44142
216-234-2111

Dennis Stocker
NASA Lcwis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd .
Cleveland. OH 44135
216-433- 2100

Denise Varga
NASA Lewis Research
M.S. 11-2
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Ckvcland. OH -+-+115
216-433-5190

J.lmes ri~n
Case Western Reserve University
Dept. of Mechanical & Aerospace Engr.
Cleveland, 0 H 44106-7222
216-368-4581

C~nter

Richard Verbus
Analex
3001 Aerospace Parkway
Brook Park, OH 44142
216-977-0192

Robert Tacina
NASA Lewis Research Center
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland, 0 H 44135
216-433-3588

Vladimir Volpert
Northwestern University
Dept. of Engineering Sci. & App!. Math.
Evanston, IL 60208
708-491- 53%

Fumiaki Takahashi
University of Dayton Research Institute
KL465
300 College Park
Dayton. OH 45469-0140
513-252-5577

379

Joyce Wanhainen
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 86-12
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland.OH 44135
216-433-3820

Michael Zachariah
NIST
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
Liming Zhou
7710 Lucerne Dr. #R-3O
Middleburg Hts., OH 44130
216-433-0820

Curtis Watts
Grumman Space Station Int. Div.
620 Disco\·ery Drive. 3rd Floor
HUnlS\111e. AL 35806
205-971-6107
Joseph Wehrmeyer
University of Missouri-Columbia
Mech. and Aerospace Engr. Dept.
1020 Engr. Building East
Columbia. ~lO 65211
314-882·0878
Karen Weiland
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 500-217
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Clevebnd.OH 4-+135
216-433-3623
Carl Wickstrom
University of Arkansas
Dept. of ~ lech. Engr.
Fayett\i ll e. AK 72701
501-5 75-~503

Forman \\'i lliams
U niversilv of California. San Diego
9500 G il man Dri\'e
[J -O 10

La Jolla. CA 92093
6 19-5 3 -1-5~<J2

Michael Winter
United Technologies Research
MIS 90
Silver Lane
E. Hartiord. cr 06108
203-727-7805
Sylvia Yang
NASA Lewis Research Center
M.S. 86-5
21000 Brookpark Rd.
Cleveland. OH 44135
2 16-433-3"..~9

380

/

I

Form Approved

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

OMB No. 0704-0188

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, Including the time for reviewing Instructions, searching eXisting data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding thiS burden estimate or any other aspect of thiS
collectIOn of informatton, including suggestIOns for reducing thiS burden, to Washington Headquarters ServICes. Directorate for information OperatIOns and Reports . 1215 JeHerson

Davis Highway,

Su~e

1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the OffICe of Management and Budget. Paperwork Reduction Prolect (0704-0188) , Washington, DC 20503.

1- AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

2
1 .

REPORT DATE

February 1993

3

(

REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

1 .

Conference Publication

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5. FUNDING NUMBERS

Second International Microgravity Combustion Workshop
WU-674-22-05

I

,

6. AUTHOR(S)

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Lewis Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3 191

E-7309

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMES(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

\

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, D.C. 20546-0001

NASA CP-10II3

11- SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

Responsible person, Howard D. Ross, (216) 433-2562.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STA TEM ENT

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

Unclassified - Unlimited
Subject Category 29

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

This CP contains 40 papers prese nted at the Second International Microgravity Combustion Workshop held in Cltvcland,
Ohio from September 15 to 17, 1992. The purpose of the workshop was twofold: to exchange information about th e
progress and promise of combustion science in microgravity and to provide a forum to discuss which areas in
microgravity combustion science need to be expanded profitably and which should be included in upcoming NASA
Research Announcements (NRA).

15. NUMBER OF PAGES

14_ SUBJECT TERMS

389
Microgravity and fire; Combustion; Flammability

16. PRICE CODE

A17
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF REPORT

Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF THIS PAGE

Unclassified

19, SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF ABSTRACT

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT

Unclassified
,

,

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
ANSI Std. Z39-1B

Prescribed b

I

