LASER

DIAGNOSTICS

FOR MICROGRAVITY

DROPLET

STUDIES

Michael Winter
United Technologies
East Hartford,

Research

Connecticut

Center
06108

N

9

3"

2

0

1

9

Rapid advances have recently
been made in numerical
simulation
of droplet combustion
under microgravity
conditions,
while experimental
capabilities
remain relatively primitive.
Calculations
can now provide detailed information
on mass and energy transport, complex gas-phase chemistry, multi-component
molecular
diffusion, surface evaporation
and
heterogeneous
reaction,
which provides
a clearer picture of both quasi-steady
as well as dynamic behavior
of droplet
combustion.
1 Experiments
concerning
these phenomena
typically result in pictures of the bttrning droplets, and the data
therefrom
describe droplet surface regression
along with flame and soot shell position.
With much more precise, detailed,
experimental
diagnostics,
significant gains could be made on the dynamics and flame structural changes which occur during
droplet combustion.
Since microgravity
experiments
become increasingly
more expensive
as they progress from drop
towers and flights to spaceborne
experiments,
there is a great need to maximize
the information
content from these
experiments.
Sophisticated
measurements
using laser diagnostics
on individual
droplets and combustion
phenomena
are
now possible.
These include measuring
flow patterns
and temperature
fields within droplets, 2 vaporization
rates and
vaporization
enhancement, 3 radical species pro£ding in flames 4 and gas-phase flow-tagging
velocimetry. 5 Although these
measurements
are sophisticated,
they have undergone
maturation
to the degree where with some development,
they are
applicable
to studies of microgravity
droplet combustion.
This program begining
in September
of 1992, will include a
series of measurements
in the NASA Learjet, KC-135 and Drop Tower facilities for investigating
the range of applicability
of these diagnostics
while generating
and providing
fundamental
data to ongoing NASA
research programs in this area.
This program is being conducted in collaboration
with other microgravity
investigators
and is aimed toward supplementing
their experimental
efforts.

INTRODUCTION
Measurement

Needs

Droplet

Internal
Flow
While modeling efforts

transport

and chemistry,

of droplet

I experiments

combustion

are providing

under microgravity

conditions

data on droplet surface regression

have been

rates along

expanded

to include

with flamear,

d soot shell

position.
Even these limited data disagree with theory, 6 possibly as the result of gas-phase
convection
around the droplet
and liquid-phase
convection within it. The internal flows may largely be residual from the droplet deployment
process in
which a droplet is suspended on a hypodermic
needle which is rapidly retracted.
To understand
the results of the experiment,
it is necessary to characterize these droplet flow patterns and determine if they can be dissipated over some time delay period.
Gas-Phase

Flow

.........................

Gas-phase motion over the surface of a droplet can have a profound impact on the droplet burning
deployment can leave droplets with a residual drift on the order of 1-2 mm/sec and as high as 10 mm/sec.

rate. Droplet
Relative gas-

phase motion of just a few mm/sec can result in a significant
change in the droplet burning rate. 6 The effect of spark
ignition can be a dramatic effect: it introduces a perturbation
in the gas-phase flow resulting in a second source of residual
gas/droplet motion. Techniques for anchoring a droplet in place using either fiber suspension or electrodynarnic
levitation
certainly warrant investigation.
These techniques alone, however, may not be adequate without assessing the gas-phase
flow, possibly using a flow tagging or velocimetry
imaging approach.

149
PREC._EDiNG

P/_iGE

BLAI'_K

NOT

FILMED

5

Flame

Front

PoiitiOn _

Knowing the position of the reaction front is important for anchoring computer models.
Currently, an
approximation of this position is obtained from back-illuminati0n images andnatural light imaging on a second _efa¢
...........
th_e_ characteristics are no t likely to be ai31e-t0 be-related directly to predicted model parameters in a quanti_ve
fashion.
These can be difficult to interpret, since they are a line of sight measurement on a spherical body. Planar iaser-_
fluorescence of OH could at least provide representative flame front positionsA-even ff only performed qualitatively. On the
lean side of the flame, OH would prove reasonable as a flame front marker. Performed in a time resolved manner, these
measurements could provide information on combustion unsteadiness regarding not only flame position relative to the
droplet but also the structure of the flame.
Liquid-Phase
Thermometry
Droplet combustion can be characterized as a generic gas phase diffusion flame with curvature but noti N suelc,h.
The flame structure is, however, to some degree rate limited by evaporation: the transfer of heat into the droplet is therefore
an important influence on the burning rate. Measuring the liquid phase temperature distribution could further the
understanding of the flame behavior, particularly for multi-component droplet combustion.
Dia_,nostic

Canabilities

Optical flow diagnostics offer several advantages over physical probes because they permit multi-point
measurements non-intrusively.
Non-intrusive measurements are of particular importance for droplet combustion and
transport in microgravity environments where physical contact would introduce perturbations.
The resolution of these
diagnostics can also isolate transport to length-scales much smaller than the droplet diameter. These techniques can be
configured to instantaneously map an entire flow field in two and three dimensions, providing either qualitative or
quantitative information on the distribution of a desired scalar.
Internal

Circulation
and Quenched
Fluorescence
The capability for measuring flow patterns within individual droplets 7 using oxygen quenching of laser-induced
fluorescence has been demonstrated. Decane doped with naphthalen e was used for the initial experiments. DroPlets ffoma
'
droplet-on-demand generator fall a short distance into a chamber filled with nitrogen and a variable amount oFoxygen. A
thin sheet of ultra-violet light from the fourth harmonic of a Nd:YAG laser at 266 nm illuminates single droplets. A
magnified image of the naphthalene fluorescence ts recorded digitally using a two-dimensional vidicon det_tor interfaced to
a laboratory computer. Since oxygen is a strong fluorescence quencher, any liquid volume element which has been exposed
to it by surface contact or diffusion will suffer a reduction in fluorescence intensity. Convection from the surface due to
internal circulation and diffusion cause oxygenated image regions to appear darker. Oxygen-free experiments provid--ea
baseline case for comparison. These data are shown in Fig. 1. This diagnostic can be used to describe flow patterns within
droplets, and for determination of relaxation times for the motion to dissipate.
Exciplex

Thermometry
Temperature measurements have been performed within droplets as a function of ambient temperature using two

color detection. 2 The temperature measurement technique used is exciplex fluorescence thermometry, which exploits the
fluorescence at two different wavelengths resulting from the reaction of an excited dopant molecule to form an excited-state
corn lt/J_ or exciplex. 8 The technique was used to measure the temperature along a meridian plane of the droplets. An
exciplex system is formed using naphthalene/TMPD in decane. At higher temperatures, the system monotonically shifts to
increase monomer selective concentration and monomer fluorescence (blue/violet) dominates, hence, the ratio of monomer
fluorescence over exciplex fluorescence (green) and the intensity ratio can yield the temperature. The resulting fluorescence
from the droplet is imaged in two dimensions at both wavelength regions. The pixel-to-pixel ratio of these two images can
be used, after calibration, to obtain the temperature.. Th_ismeasurement would be especially important for com_usting
multi-component droplets but due to the sensitivity to oxygen quenching has been_xl_.o
&ae in-n0n combusting sysi_ns.
As will be described below, mlcrogravity droplet combustion may present an ideal opportunity for implementation of this
approach since the symmetric envelope flame may preclude oxygen from contacting the droplet fluid.
Levitation
and Suspension
of Droplets
The aforementioned diagnostic techniques rely on a droplet occupying a known position to allow the laser beam to
"slice" through a central plane precisely. The dr_let surface acts like a lens, bending the incident rays toward the center of
the droplet. The light will appear to not fill the circumference (top and bottom) of the droplet if the illumination sheet is
not incident on a great circle, slicing exactly through the center of the droplet. In typical microgravity experiments, slight
drifts in droplet position are unavoidable. These drifts may be due to either droplet relative motion within the test chamber,

i
150
Z

or, g-jitter which is typical of microgravity environments
on aircraft
These drifts, however,
either an electrodynamic
levitator er an extremely small fiber to tether the droplet.

can be compensated

for by

Producing
and supporting
a droplet on a thin fiber or filament
can be achieved
repeatedly
with automated
deployment.
A droplet-on-demand
generator can produce a single droplet which is brought into contact with the fiber
filament.
When the filament has a slight material bead or buildup at some position along its length, the droplet becomes
anchored and supported at that position. This arrangement
is shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of the fiber and roundness of
the bead require careful attention relative to the droplet diameter so as not to change the surface contour of the droplet at the
wetting surface of the fiber. With careful consideration,
these criteria are easily met. Droplets supported in this manner can
be used for experimentation
even in the presence of g-jitter. It should be noted that while the g-jitter effects the data quality,
it will not effect the success of the experiments.
Flame

Front
and
Gas-Phase
Velocimetry
An additional research requirement would

be detailing

the gas-phase

flow field and position

of the flame fronL

This can be achieved using Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLI_ of OH 4 which is typically performed by tuning a laser
to the OH molecular
absorption and recording the emitted radiation with a two-dimensional
detector.
Laser sources and
detection systems capable of operating under the power and shock environments
typical of drop tower conditions may be
available, however, some development is likely to be required. An alternative approach would be to provide laser-induced
fluorescence
from a diagnostic seed included in the liquid-phase fuel which would be consumed at the flame front. This, in
principle,
would be easier, and lower risk since the diagnostic
capabilities and instrumentation
already exist. The main
advantage to this approach would be that the wavelength of the molecular absorption involved can be chosen to coincide
with convenient laser wavelengths
than lasers can be configured to access OH. The details of this approach will be given
under the project description.

different

Gas-phase flow tagging is capable of del'ming the flow field around the droplet and can be performed
ways.
For post-combustion
gas conditions,
photodissociating
water vapor in known spatial

in a number of
locations
and

subsequently
recording
the PLIF of OH yields gas phase velocities. 5 This approach
is probably beyond the scope of
microgravity
applications
due to its complexity
and inslxumentation
requirements.
An alternative
approach would be to use
laser-induced
phosphorescence,
by writing lines in a pre-seeded flow and subsequent
imaging the convection
of triplet-state
excited molecules.
In this way, gas-phase velocities and flame positions could be measured.
Particle
Image Velocimetry
(PIV) holds the potential
for recording
two-components
of velocity
in a twodimensional
plane. Conventional
techniques like Laser Doppler Velocimetry
would not be appropriate
because it is a point
technique and would not provide information
related to the global flow field. PIV uses lasers to illuminate
a seemed fluid
with two short, properly-timed
pulses.
In this way, each particle in a sheet of laser light can be illuminated
and imaged
twice in a flame of an imaging device such as a CCD camera.
With this information,
spatially resolved maps of two
components
of velocity can be determined.
The proper selection of image magnification,
pulse timing, particle size and
seed rate, allow a two-dimensional
velocity field to be acquired instantaneously.
Video acquisition
systems and computer
software are used to process the images and manipulate them to produce the vector field.

PROJECT

DESCRIPTION

Program

Plan
The objective of this program is to perform a series of measurements
to investigate
the range of applicability
of
advanced
laser diagnostics
to microgravity
applications
while generating
as much fundamental
data to ongoing NASA
microgravity
research programs as possible.
Through consultation
with NASA personnel, and other researchers
in the field
of microgravity
droplet transport and combustion,
priorities will be established
with respect to measurement
parameters.
The measurement
parameters currently under consideration are:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

droplet internal flow
relative gas-phase flow around droplets
flame front position
liquid-phase thermometm-y.

An integrated
diagnostic
unit, capable of performing
these measurements
will be assembled.
All of the major
components
such as lasers, detectors and data systems are currently available and allocated to this effort.
A self-contained
miniature nitrogen-pumped
dye laser system and two-dimensional
intensified diode-array
imaging system will form the core
of the unit.

151

The testing program will proceed with ever more challenging environments proceeding from the laboratory, to
flight based tests, and finally, to drop tower facilities. The diagnostic approaches and instrumentation would be verifa_d in a
laboratory setting. Experiments with the intent of reducing the risks associated with high impact and droplet drift would be
conducted on either the Learjet or KC-135 Aircraft with fiber slispended droplets. Measurements will be performed on
droplet internal flow patterns and the applicability of liquid phase thermometry in a burning droplet. Investigations will be
made into performing PLIF measurements of OH or a diagnostic seed material to describe flame front position. Gas-phase
flow dynamics will be determmed by velocity measurements usmg particle image vetocimeu%
Risk

Reduction
Flight Experiments
......
-_
Initial experiments are designed to reduce the risks assoc/ated with high impact and droplet drift. Ex_m_
of
droplet combustion under mtcrogravity conditions are best if carried out in either the NASA LeRC 2.2-Second Drop Tower,
or the 5.18-Second Zero-Gravity Facility, to provide a "clean" set of experimental conditions. Two aspects of these
facilities and the environment they provide present the greatest chanengesto
laser diagnostic implementation. Fur,, the
impact at the bottom of the tower can range from 60 -70 g's. Designing advanced instnfmdaiation m sustain these impacts
is quite difficult. A risk reduction step _s to _,_,
rform a test sequence aboard the NASA Aircraft Micrograv!_ F_ties.
Although the aircraft do not provide as clean a microgravity environment, (-10 -z g), the diagnostic could be developed
while still providing quality data. These experiments would be followed by measurements m the LeRC 2.2-Sec.ond Drop
Tower.
Isolate

Droplet
Motion
The second challenge to diagnostic implementation is the droplet drift present in all previous microgravity droplet
experiments. As described above, droplet deployment is always accompanied by some initial Velocitywhich is _mparted on
the dropleL The relative motion of the droplet to the ambient gas can result m significant change in the burning behavior.
Furthermore, this motion complicates the diagnostics. To alleviate these problems the experiments can be performed on
droplets supported on a thin fiber, or supported in an electrodynamic trap. Fiber support is relatively simpTe, however,
detailed measurements of the effect of the fiber boundary on droplet internal flow paaems would still need to be undersuxxl.
The operation of electrodynamic traps becomes considerably simplified at low gravity due to the rec!_
u__ccdf0_
on file

droplet
An automated deployment system will be coupled to thin filament suspension. A droplet-on-demand generau_ will
produce a single droplet which is brought into contact with the fiber filament. The filament will have a slight material bead
or buildup at some position along its length so that the droplet becomes anchored and supported at that p6s_--tionas is
shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of the fiber and roundness of the bead will receive careful attention relative to the droplet
diameter so as not to change the surface contour of the droplet at the wemng surface of the fiber. Droplets supported in this
manner will be used for experimentation even in the presence of g-jitter: It should be noted that even though the g-jitter
effects the quality of the data relative to combustion due to the gas-phase fluctuations, it will not effect the success of the
experiments.
Internal

Flow Patterns
Initial measurements are directed toward describing the internal flow pauerns of droplets in a non-combusting
cnvironmenL The convecuon of oxygen dissolved into the surface fluid of an isothermal, non-burning drop=letwi_l!be
detected by the quenching of laser-induced fluorescence. The fluorescence images will be recorded in twodimcnfl_ _
from a
laser sheet, provided by a compact nitrogen laser, which slices through the interior of the droplet. This m_ent
can be
performed in a time-phased manner with the introduction of a time delay to evaluate temporal evolution. These experiments
could potentially answer questions relating deviations between current experiments and theory.
Liquid-Phase
Thermometry
......
An extension of the flow measurement techniques will provide liquid-phase thermometry us_g the same a_.
Laser-induced exciplex thermometry can be employed in a burning droplet, if it could be shown that no oxygen permeated
into the measurement regions. This would be expected in microgTavity conditions where a symmetric envelope flame
surrounds the droplet and consumes oxygen prior to dissolution in the liquid-phase. This assumption is easily verified by
repeating the flow pattern measurements on burning droplets. Liquid-phase thermometry would qualitatively confirm
modeling assumptions while providing quantitative temperature data.
Flame

Front Measurements
Development of the UTRC diagnostic system will be d_ted
toward PLIF of OH_ Potentially minor
modifica_ons to the nitrogen laser system may allow it to operate on excimer gases such as XeCI, thus p_m.
Vt._#
of directly exciting the OH molecule. Alteratively, arc lamp illumination could be used. This would provide nnage data on
152

the
position

of the flame front around a burning droplet. A second alternative approach would be to pedorm las_-induced
fluorescence from a diagnostic seed included in the liquid-phase fuel which would be consumed at the flame fronL This, in
principle, would be easier and the diagnostic capabilities and instrumentation already exist. The main advantage to this
approach would be that the molecular absorpuon wavelength can be chosen to coincide with more-easily-accessed
laser
wavelengths than those of OH. Several diagnostic materials arc available with readily available absorptions, high
fluorescence yields, and flammability limits similar to typical fuels, i.e., biacetyl in methanol. For these studies, the
niuvgen laser will be used in conjunction with the dye laser tuned to the appropriate wavelength.
Gas-Phase

Flow

Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) holds the potential for recording two-components of velocity in a twodimensional plane. PIV will be performed using two pulses from the nitrogen laser to illuminate the gas surrounding the
droplet after it is seeded with aerosol particles. In this way, each particle in a sheet of laser light can be illuminated and
imaged twice in a frame of the imaging system. With this information, two components of the velocity vector will be
determined. The proper combination of image magnification, pulse timing, particle size and seed rate, provide
instantaneous two-dimensional velocity fields. Computer software to process these images and manipulate them to produce
the vector field is currently in use at UTRC.
Conclusions
This research program provides measurements investigating the range of applicability of these advanced diagnostics
while generating fundamental information relevant to ongoing NASA programs in microgravity droplet combustion. Using
a progressive approach, advanced laser diagnestics will be transported from laboratory, to flight experiments, and ultimately
to drop tower facilities. In this way, these diagnostics can be developed, while providing fundamental data on droplet
transport and combustion at an early date. The experiments and measurement parameters suggested here, reflect the needs of
other researchers in this area. Dissemination of the results of this program throughout the community will effect their
research directly. At the conclusion of this program, the technology demonstrated herein will be applicable to futm'e ground
based research, as well as space based operation aboard future Shuttle, Space Lab or Space Station Freedom laboratory
modules. The facility and techniques demonstrated would serve as a stepping stone for future programs. Development and
demonstration of this technology at this time, is a prerequisite for these far reaching goals.

References
,

.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8

Cho, S. Y., Yetter, R. A. and Dryer, F. L.; A Computer Model for One-Dimensional Mass and Energy Transport
in and Around Chemically Reacting Particles, Including Complex Gas-Phase Chemistry, Multicomponent
Molecular Diffusion, Surface Ev_on
and Heterogeneous Reaction, Journal of Computational Physics, 1991.
Winter, M.; Temperature Measurements Inside A Falling Droplet, ILASS, May 1990.
Anderson, T. J. and Winter, M.; Measurement of The Effect of Acoustic Disturbances on Droplet Vaporization
Rates, AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno Nevada, 1992.
Hanson, R. K.; Combustion Diagnostics: Planar Imaging Techniques, Twenty-First Symposium (International)
on Combustion, p. 1677, 1986.
Boedeker, L. R.; Velocity Measurement By H20 Photolysis and Laser-lnduced Fluorescence of OH, Optics Letters,
Vol. 14 p. 473, 1989.
Williams, F. A.,Dryer, F. U; Preliminary Science Requirements
Document For The Droplet Combustion
Apparatus, NASA LeRC, 1991
Winter, M. and Melton, L. A.;Measurement of Internal Circulation in Droplets Using laser-Induced Fluorescence,
Applied Optics, Vol. 29, No. 31, p. 4574, 1990.
Murray, A. M., and Melton, L. A.; Fluorescent Methods for Determination of Temperature in Fuel Sprays, Appl.
Optics, Vol. 24, p. 2783, 1985.

153

÷ ........

Oxygen

Ambient

....

Fig.

i

droplets

Nitrogen

-........

--

Measurement
using

Ambient

==_

_

k

'

:: <

of internal

fluorescence

Oxygen/Nitrogen

circulation

from

within

quenching.
See COlor Plate C-Ta

|

i

b

:

:

Fig. 2
Surface fluorescence
quenching
from a droplet supported
on a fiber.

See COlor Plate C-7b
154
=

COMMENTS
Question
(A. Gomez, Yale University): In an electrodynamic
balance, typically, a DC fickl is uscd to
counterbalance
gravity and AC field is used to provide lateral stability.
In the microgravity
cxpcriments
the
g-field is highly variable.
Have you thought about a feasible feedback system to accuratcly
change your DC
voltage over several orders of magnitude?
Answer:

The

electrodynamic

balance

can be operated

with a DC field, an AC field, or a supcrposition

of

both.
In one-g, the gravitational
influence is typically offset with the DC field, and the AC field is applied to
provide lateral stability.
The levitator can, however, be operated
stably with just thc AC field cvcn at one-g,
eliminating
the need to actively adjust the DC voltage for changes
in gravitational
ficld or droplet mass.
Since the AC field provides a force towards equilibrium
corresponding
to an opposite vclocity of thc droplet,
strong AC fields tend to overdrive the droplets
resulting
in oscillations.
The AC frcqucncy
must be tuned for
stability, corresponding
to a reaction time-constant
relating droplet inertia and drag. Our cxpcricnce
has
shown that for droplets
in the 500 micron diameter
range at atmospheric
conditions
frcqucncics
of the order
of 400 Hz are most appropriate.
Question
diameter
measured

(C.T. Avcdisian,
Corncll University):
How do you plan to "calibrate" your approach fl_r flame
mcasurcmcnt
bascd on CH idcntification?
For examplc, do you plan to compare
flame diameter
from

photographs

with your laser based

flame

Answer: In hydrocarbon
flames, CH radical laser-i,lduccd
best indicator
of most intense chcmical reactions.
While

diameter?
fluorcsccnce
photographic

is accepted in the literalure
as the
rccording
of broadband
flame

luminosity
is often used for indicating flame positions,
these measurcmcnts
suffer from both spatial ambiguity
associated
with line-of-sight
obser_'ation,
and assumptions
rclatcd to non-equilibrium
chemistry
and excitedstate radical-species
formation.
Comparisons
will be attempted
bctween
luminosity observations
and the
laser-induced
fluorescence
flamc frtmt indicator to be uscd in this study, to cstablish correspondence
between
the approachcs.

155

i
!
|

SESSION

D - PREMIXED

(Chair, Mitchell Smooke)

FLAMES

l

Z

Z
==Z

=

Z

