N96-15559
THE EFFECTS

OF SOOTING

Kyeong-Ook

IN DROPLET

Lee, Kirk Jensen and Mun Young

Department

of Mechanical

University

Choi

Engineering

of Illinois at Chicago

Chicago,
1.0

COMBUSTION

IL 60607

INTRODUCTION

The study of the burning of a single droplet is an ideal problem from which to gain fundamental understanding of diffusion
flame characteristics Droplet combustion is a complex physico-chemical process that involves a chemically-reacting two-phase flow
with phase changes and yet simple experiments and analysis can be used to attain important insights into the burning rate, flame
dynamics, kinetic extinction and disruption processes.
It is a subject that has been actively studied for the past 40 years with most
of the fundamental
experiments
being
performed
under reduoed-gravity
conditions
for direct comparisons
with
theoretical/computational
analyses that invoke spherical symmetry assumptions.
In the earlier studies, the effects of sooting on the overall burning characteristics were not considered [Kumagai and Okajima,
1957; Kumagai, Sakai and Okajima, 1971 ]. However, recent microgravity investigations performed at the NASA-LeRC
droptowers
(Droplet Combustion Experiment ofProfessor
F.A. Williams and Professor F.L Dryer) and others indicate that effects of soot
and sootcloud ormation
f
may be significant
during
thelifetime
ofthedroplet
and therefore
must be included
intheanalysis Y_ght
[
and Williams,
1980; Shaw ctal., 988; Choi etal., 990;Jacksonetal., 991;Avedisian,
1
1
1
1994].
1.1

Droplet Burning Rate
Sooting mechanisms can have profound effects on the overall droplet burning rate. In an earlier study on microgravity nheptane droplet combustion experiments, vaporization rates that were as much as 30% to 40% lower than the classically-accepted
results were reported [Choi et al., 1990]. The main conclusion drawn from that investigation was that the effects of formation and
accumulation of the sootshell and its asymmetric configuration caused by snail degrees of relative droplet/gas convection were
responsible
fortheobserveddiscrepancies.here areseveralechanisms throughwhich soot/sootshell
T
m
formation
can affect
the
burningrate.Soot formation
isan endothermic
process
and will
actas a heatsinkfortheenergythatwould otherwise used to
be
vaporizethefuel.
Although,exactfiguresortheconversion osootisnotpresentlynown formicrogravityroplet
f
t
k
d
combustion,
results
from normal gravityyrolysis xperiments
p
e
suggest
relatively conversion
large
rates 30% [Vranos and Liscinsky,984].
~
1
Furthermore,
heatloss theflamedue tosootradiation
at
canreducetheeffective
transfer
number by decreasing heamount ofenergy
t
available
tovaporize hefuel. elated
t
R
tothese
phenomcm is
theaccumulationftheformed sootintheregion
o
bounded by thedroplet
and theflame. This representsnrealized hemicalenergyresulting
u
c
inthereduction ftheheatofcombustion available
o
from the
vaporizedfuel.
1.2

Extinction

Analysis of the extinction mechanism during droplet combustion is important for extracting overall chemical kinetic rates
for large hydrocsdxaxs for which detailed information does not exist [Chung and Law, 1986; Williams and Dryer, 1994]. Extinction
occurs when the flow time of the reactants becomes smaller than the time needed for the reactants to be consumed (when the
Dakmkohler number is reduced below a critical value). The critical Dabmkolaler number is given by where d m is the extinction
diameter, D_ isthe ditRusivity and t=is the characteristic chemical reaction time.

Da

=

(z)

t
¢

However, extinction can oeem- prematurely if radiative losses from the flame decreases the flame temperature and therefore effeot the
chemical reaction time. Chao and coworkers [Chao et al., 1990] suggest that radiative losses from the flame can promote the onset
ofldnetic extinction. For droplet flames that produce sooL it is likely that soot radiation will dominate and therefore affect the kinetic
extraction process [Grosshandler,
1992]. Thus far, only a limited number of extinction measurements
have been reported for nheptane droplets burning in air [Yang and Avedisian, 1988; Hara and Kumagal, 1990]. However, the extinction diameter is usually
very small and not always reproducible under mildly sooting conditions. Without accurate determination of the soot concentration
near the flame, it is not known to what degree soot formation may eventually affect droplet extinction.

PAGE

NOT FILMED

1.3

Disruptive Burning
In a previous work by Knight and Williams [1980], disruption was observed during the combustion of alkane droplets in
a rm'crogravity environment_ I)im_tion is a process by which the original droplet is violently shattered and bums as smaller satellite
droplets. In subsequent experiments in the NASA-Lewis droptower [Shaw et al., 1988], it was found that the likelihood of observing
the disruption behavior was higher for fuels (and or conditions such as higher oxygen concentrations)
that produc_
high soot loading.
Shaw and Williams [1990] presented results that suggest that the absorption of heavy soot precursors on the droplet surface
can create conditions in which an outer layer (of soot precursors) can reach temperatures exceeding the superheat temperature of the
original
heating.

fuel. Another possible mechanism suggests that the soot particles can come in contact with the droplet and cause rapid
Although a definitive explanation does not exist, it is clear that the sooting mechanism is very important m the disruptive

burning process.
1.4

Thermophoresis
For droplet combustion, soot particles form in the fuel-rich region of the diffusion flame through pyrolysis reactions.
These
reactions are high-activation energy processes and thus maximum soot production will likely occur near the flame [Shaw et al. 1988].
Once soot is formed in the fuel-rich region, they are acted upon by viscous drag (caused by Stefan flow) and Thermophoresis.
Thermophoresis
is a mechanism through which particle transport is caused by a temperature gradient in the surrounding
gas-phase
[Friedlander, 1977]. Waldmann and Schmitt [1966] analyzed the viscous drag and thermophoretic
force acting on a small spherical
particle by calculating the momentum transferred per unit time to the particle by the impinging and rebounding gas molecules.
At
equilibrium
[_,F is equal to 0], these two forces are balanced. The resulting equation can then be solved for the flux, pVe

- 3_dT/dr
p

Vt -

(2)
-g(r)

4(1 +x a/g)T
The term, pVo is defined as the thermophorefic flux. The thermophoretic flux is the convective flux necessary for the above-mentioned
force equilibrium on the particle to be maintained.
Opposing the thermophoretic
forces is the viscous drag caused by the Stefan flux, where (din/dr) is the droplet mass
gasification rate.

pr =

dm/dt

(3)

4_r 2

Eqn. 3 is valid under conditions ofneghgible surface regression rate compared to the gas velocity at the surface which is satisfied when
the ratio of the liquid to gas densities is large. The sootshell will form at the radial position where the viscous drag and thermophoretic
forcos are in balance.
The above formulation is valid for soot particles that are much smaller than the mean flee path. Jackson and coworkers
[1991 ] implcmmted the thermophoretic model of Talbot and coworkers [ 1980]. In this model, the sootsheU location can be calculated
by assuming the soot particle dimension. Therefore, the measurement of the characteristic dimensions of the soot particles (including
the radius of gyration and primary particle size using thermophoretic
sampling and TEM) will be important in comparing the
experimental
l.S

and theoretical

sootshell

locations.

Droplet Flame Dynamics
The flame diameter is also affected by the soot formation through reductions

in the specific

volume [Choi et al., 1993 ]. After

the initial period of fuel vap_ accumulation (during which fuel vapor flUs the increasing volume between the droplet surface and the
flame front), quasi-steady conditions should exist under which the gasified mass win equal the mass consumed at the flame front
However, under sooting conditions, portions of the gasified fuel are converted to soot (which possess negligible specific volume when
compared to that of the gaseous species). Therefore, soot accumulates in the sootsheU and never reaches the flame front.
2.0

The Need for Accurate Measurement
of Soot Volume Fraction and Temperature
Since the pioneering microgravity droplet combustion _ents
of Kumagai and coworkers back in 1957, there have been
numerous theoretical, computational
and experimental studies analyzing the burning characterstics of isolated droplets.
In all
subsequent microgravity droplet combustion studies, the degree of sooting was estimated by visual observations of the sootshell. This
practice could not provide detailed information regarding the transient distribution of the soot and temperature in the region bounded
by the flame and the droplet. For all of the important parameters of interest in droplet combustion including the variations in the
54

buraing rate, promotion of extinction, reduction in flame size, onset of disruptive burning and soot dynamics, it is clear that accurate
measurements ofthe degree of sooting and the temperature field within the region bounded by the droplet and the flame is needed to
further advance our undcrstaading.
In the present study, the sooting behavior will be studied using light extinction measurements and Abel deconvolution to
determine the radial distribution of soot volume fi'action; two-wavelength optical pyrometry to determine the soot temperature within
the region between the flame and the droplet; and thermophoretic sampling/transmission
electron microscopy to determine the soot
morphology (radius of gyration and primary particle size). In addition, computational modeling [using the Chemically-Reacting-FlowModel of Princeton] of the soot particle dynamics involving the balance between thcrmophoresis
and Stefan drag will be compared
with the experimental measurements.
The modeling efforts will be advanced interactively with the experimental measurements
of
the soot volume fractions and the soot particle dimensions.
These experiments will be performed for a wide range of conditions to vary the sooting propensity of the droplet using
various fuels (including decane, hoptane, toluene/methanol
mixtures, benzene/methanol
mixtures and ethanol etc.), pressure (0.1 to
1.0 arm), oxygen indices (0.15 to 0.50), initial droplet diameters (1.0 to 5.0 mm) and inerts (N:, He, CO:, etc.) as parameters.
3.0
3.1

EXPERIMENTAL
APPROACH
Soot Volume Fraction Measurements

Kadota and Hiroyasu [1984] first me,asatd scot conomtration in droplet flames using optical techniques.
In their study, light
extinction measurements were perfom_
at a fixed location below the droplet and the radial variation was deduced by assuming that
the regressing flame maintained constant spherical structure.
This procedure may produce realistic information since the flame
geometry
isnearly
spherical
intheregion
belowthedroplet,
However,thesame approachwillproduceunrealistic
results
intheregion
above theflamewhere it
displays othaxial
b
and radial
variations.
In thepresent
experim_t, thesootvolume frastion bc measured usinga full-field extinction
will
light
technique
thatwas
developedatNASA-Lewis Research Center by Greenberg, Grilrm and Ku [Gr/i_ and C-rcenberg,
1992; Greenberg and Ku,
1995]for
eventual seinmeasuringthesootvolume fractionor
u
f microgravity
droplet
combustion.Feasibility
ofthis
technique
was
investigated performingsootvolume fraction
by
measurementsforsuspendeddroplets urningundernormal-gravityonditions.
b
c
Fig.I displays
theschematic
oftheexperimental
apparatus
similarothesystemofGreenbergand Ku [I
t
995]. Lightfrom
theHeNe laser
isfirst
passedthrougha variable etm, ldensityalter expanded througha spatial
n
a
f
and
filter/collimator
toproduce a
50ram diameter eam. The beam is
b
directed
th'ough
opposingoptical
ports
(eachfitted
with5 Imm diameterquartz
windows) ofthe
stainless
steel
droplet
combustionchamber. The transmitted
beam isimaged usinga high-resolution
CCD camera (withattached
interference neutral
and
density
filters). entireurninghistory
The
b
isrecorded
ontoa S-VHS recorder
and subsequently
theimage
is digitized
frame-by-frameusing a high-resolution
(512x480 pixels)
dataacquisition
board. Measurements indiuat¢ hatthe
t
laser/detection
system isvery stable
withtemporalfluctuations thelight ntensity than0.5% ofthetotal agnitude ofthe
of
i
less
m

intensity.
For thenormal-gravityroplet
d
combustionexperiment, single
a
droplet
of2ram diameter
isdeposited a bead that
on
is
formed atthe end of thesuspendingquartz
fiber
(diameter sapproximately
i
150 miorometers)
usinga hypodermic needle.The
orientation
ofthefiber
asshown ininset infig. was designed
A
I
tominimizeinteractions
withtheburningby reducingits
contact
withtheflame(Fortl_proposedmicrogravity
¢xpcrinamt,
droplets
willbe suspendedby usingcross-hairs
of50 micron silica
carbide
fibers). he droplets
T
arcignited
usingan inductionoil
c
discharge gniter.
i
For each horizontal
plane,
theline
ofsight
projection
data, _(x),
P
isgivenby:

(4)
-m

The Abel transform allowsthecalculation
ofthefield istributionfv(r)
d
corresponding
totheprojectionatawiththeunderlying
d
assumption thatitisradiallyymme_c [Santoro al., 983;Dasch, 1992, Sunderlandetal., 995]. The sootvolume fraction
s
et
1
1
distribution
(basedon extinction)
isfound fromthemeasured transmission
ofeachprojection:

• Cx)
=

cxp[- -.

2 + ybdy]

(s)

where K, is the dimensienless extinction constant of soot. In this study, Ko value of 8.8 which was measured for soot in the post-flame
region of a rich acetylene flame was used [Choi et al., 1995]. Equation 5 can be rearranged into the form of the projection value as:

55

(6)
•

_Lo

-'_

For a typical experiment, nearly 200 images are produced, therefore, full-field determination
of the soot volume fraction measurements
requires the analysis ofmore than 30,000 projection data files. To increase the efficiency, a fifll-field algorithm was written to analyze
the entire experiment [Greenbcrg and Ku, 1995 have also wriRen a similar algorithm].
In the present study, the soot volume fraction is measured as a function of radial position for hydrocarbon mixture flames
at various heights above the droplet. Figure 2 displays the resulting G/Go (where G corresponds to graylevel) profiles for t = 2 sec
ignition. The entire image is filtered using a 3x3 low-pass filter and the individual vertical position data is 5-pt averaged. The
horizontal axis corresponds to the column position and the vertical axis corresponds to row positions. The maximum attenuation is
approximately equal to 0.4. From this profile, the soot volume fraction is determined using the full-field Abel-deconvolution
algorithm
[See fig. 3]. A curve-fitting algorithm is used to define the center of the sooting region for each vertical position and the soot volume
fraction on either side of the center is averaged to obtain the final output. The soot volume fraction increases from as a function of
height and radial position from the center. The soot volume fraction
consistent with the s_cture of diffusion flames.

is maximum

near the flame at all vertical

locations

which is

3.2

Soot Temperature
Measurement
Technique
The temperattre of the soot particles within the region between the droplet surface and the flame front will be measured using
a two-wavelength
pyrometry and Abel deconvolution [Faeth, 1994]. The emission from the flame will be simultaneously directed
to two separate CCD cameras (with a narrow bandpass filters at 800 nm and 900 nm) using a beamsplitter. Due to the small size of
soot particles, the discrepancy with the local gas temperatures is expected to be small [KOylo and F aeth, 1993]. The emission mtonsity
at each central wavelength measured for a vertical plane corresponds to the projection value of the integrated emission.

PI(x)

(7)

= "fKxI_,xdy

36xn/r

fv

:

(s)
(n 2 _

where

Iba is Planck's

function.

The projections

k 2 + 2) 2 + 4n2k 2 JL

values for 800 nm and 900 rim can be deconvoluted

separately

using the Abel

technique to determine the corresponding
product of (Kalba) as a function of radial position. The ratio of the emission at 800 nm
and 900 nm can then be used to determine the temperatme using the two-wavelength
pyrometry formula [Sivathanu and F aeth, 1990 ].
3.3

Soot Morphology Measurement
Technique
The morphology of soot aggregates will be determined by performing thermophoretic sampling experiments
[lVlegaridis and
Dobbins, 1988]. Thin ribbons of copper mesh grids will be rapidly inserted into the flame to obtain instantaneous
distribution of soot
morphology. Temporal variation of the soot will be determined by inserting different ribbons at pre-determmed
times. Subsequent
analyses will involve obtaining transmission electron micrographs
and analyzing the radius of gyration using a non-subjective
digital
image processing technique that was developed as part of this project [Choi and Zhou, 1995].
4.0

PROGRESS

a)

A droplet combustion chamber which utilizes several features of the DCE droptower hardware is being fabricated at NASALeRC to take advantage of the design solutions. The UIC team will incorporate all of the optical diagnostic equipment
to the experimental package. It is anticipated that an operational soot volume fraction/temperature
rig to be used in the DC-9
and in the 2.2 see droptower will be ready by mid-summer
of 1995.
A full-field normal-gravity droplet combustion apparatus to perform soot volume fraction measurements
was implemented
at UIC.
Performed experiments using various hydrocarbon mixture droplets.
(results will be presented at the Central States Sectional Meeting of the Combustion Institute, 1995).
Developed an interactive Abel-deeonvolution
algorithm to determine soot volume fraction for full-field light extinction data.
This program manipulates the full-field digitized image data and produces the I/Io information at every single pixel location.
The information is then used to determine the soot volume fraction information for each horizontal plane.

b)
c)

TO DATE

56

d)
e)
0

Similar program was also written for two-wavelength pyrometry.
Developed a digital image processing program to determine the radius of gyration from l_ansmission electron micrographs.
The students are fully trained in TEM and Selected Area Eleclxon Diffraction Techniques.
Submitted a proposal (with P. Ferkul and D. Schultz of NASA-LeRC) to perform soot volume fraction measurements
for
droplets using the Glovebox facility.
The PI was at Lewis during the summer of 1994 working with Dr. Randy Vander Wal using laserInduced Incandescense
for performing soot volume fraction measurements
m droplet combustion.
(results were presented by RVW at the Eastern States Sectional Meeting of the Combustion Institute, 1994).

5.0

FUTURE

a)

Perform sootvolume fraction/temperature
measurements
under normal-gravity
fortest
conditions utlined nsection
o
i
2.
Incorporate
opticaliagnostic
d
apparatus thedropletombustionapparatus
on
c
(that sbeingbuilt
i
atNASA-LcRC) foruse
in2.2seedroptowcr
andaboardtheDC-9. Reduced-gravity
droplet
combustionexperiments
forsootvolume fractionnd
a
temperature
measurements arescheduled
formid-summer, 1995.

b)

WORK

c)
d)

Collaborate
withPrinceton
researchers
inincorporating
revised
thcrmophoreticodels tocalculateootshell
m
s
location.
Determine sootextinction
constants orvarious
f
fuels
tobe usedin sootvolume fractionxperiments.
e

6.0

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authorsgratefixUy
acknowledgehelpful
advice
regarding heimplementation f a full-field extinction
t
o
light
technique
providedby Mr. P. Greenberg,Dr.D. Cn'tffin, B. Whiteside
Mr.
and Dr. D. Urban ofNASA-LcRC.
We would alsolike
tothank
Professor DryerofPrinceton,rofessor ./LWilliamsofUCSD, Dr.R. Vandcr Wal,Dr. P. Ferkul,
F.L.
P
F
Mr. D. Schultz
and Dr.M.
Vedha-Nayagem of NASA-LeRC
and Drs.A. Hamins, T.Kashiwagiand C. ShaddixofNIST forhelpful
discussions
regarding
the
work Thiswork was supported y NASA-LeRC through
b
grant
#NAG3-163 I. KirkJensenwould like acknowledge supportfrom
to
theAMOCO
FoundationFellowship.
7.0
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
.

7.

.

9.
I0.
II.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

REFERENCES
Kumagai, S. and Isoda, H., Sixth Symposium (int'l) on Combustion, p. 139. (1957).
Kumagai, S., Sakai, T. and Okajima, S., Thirteenth Symposium (Int'l) on Combustion, p. 779 (1971).
Knight, B. and Williams, F.A., Combustion and Flame, 38:111 (1980).
Shaw, B .D., Dryer, F.L., Williams, F.A. and Haggard, J.B., Jr., Aeta Astronautica,
17:1195 (1988).
Choi, M.Y., Dryer, F.L., and Haggard, J.B., Twenty-Third Symposium 0nt'l) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA., p. 1597 (1990).
Jackson, G.S., Avedisian, C.T. and Yang, J.C., Proc. R. Soc. Lond A, 435:359 (1991).
Avedisian, C.T., "Droplet Combustion and Soot Formation in Mierogravity", Eastern States Section of the
Combustion Institute, Clearwater Beach, FL (1994).
Vranos, A. and Liscinsky, D.S., Combustion Sei. Tech., 38:145 (1984).
Chung, S.H. and Law, C.K., Combustion and Flame, 64:237 (1986).
Williams, F.A. and Dryer, F.L., Science Requirements Document for Droplet Combustion Experiment,
1994.
Chao, B.H., Law, C.K. and T'ien, J.S., Twenty-Third Symposium 0mtq) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA., p.523 (1990).
Crrosshandler, W.L., RADCAL: A Narrow Band Model for Radiation Calculation in a Combustion Environment,
NIST
Technical Note 1402 (1992).
Yang, J.C. and Avedisian, C.T., Twenty-Second
Sumposium (Int'l) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute,
p. 2037 (1988).
Hara, H. and Kumagai, S., Twenty-Third Symposium (Int'l) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, p. 1605 (1990).
Shaw, B.D. and Williams, F.A., Int. J. of Heat and Mass Transfer, 33:301 (1990).
Friedlander,
S.K., Smoke, Dust and Haze, Wiley and Sons, N.Y., (1977).
Waldmann, L. and Schmitt, ICH., Thermophoresisn
and Diffusiophoresis
of Aerosols, Chap VI in Aerosol Science (C.N.
Davies, ed.), Academic, N.Y., (1966)
Talbot. L. and Cheng, R.K., Schefer, R.W. and Willis, D.R., J. Fluid Mech. 101:737 (1980).
Choi, M.Y., Dryer, F.L., Green, G.J. and Sangiovanni, J.J., AIAA Paper 93-0823 (1993).
Kadota, T. and Hiroyasu, H., Comb. Flame, 55:195 (1984).
Griffin,
D.W. and Grcenberg,P.S.,
"Selected icrogravity Combustion Diagnostics
M
Techniques",
2nd Int'l
Microgravity
Combustion Workshop Proceedings,ept.1992.
S
Greenberg, P.S. and Ku, J.C., "Soot Volume Fraction Imaging", Applied Optics, submitted, 1995.
Santoro, R.J., Semerjian, H.G., and Dobbins, R.A., Combust. Flame 51:203 (1983).
57

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

Dasch, C.J., Applied Optics, 31:146 (1992).
Sunderland,P.B.,Koylu, U.O. and Faeth, G.M., Combust and flame, 1 10:310 (1995).
Z h q 2. and Choi, MY., "Meamrematof Dimensionless Extinction Constant of Soot Generated Usng Various Fuels", To
be presented at the CatrWestern/Mexican Sections of the Combustion Institute, San Antonio, TX,April, 1995.
Faeth, G.M.,
Science Requirements Document for Laminar Soot Processes Experiment,1994.
Kaylu, 0.0. Faeth, G.M.. Heat Transfer, 1 15:409(1 993).
and
J.
Sivathanu, Y .Rand Faeth, G.M., Combstion and Flame, 81 :150 (1 990).
Megaridis, C.M. and Dobbins, R.A, Twentysecond Symposium (znt'l) on Combustioq p. 353,1988.
Choi, MY. andZhou, Z., Digital Image procesSing Algorithm for the Measurement of Soot Radius of Gyration, in progress,
1995.
HeNe Laser
Beam

Attenuator

Beam -der

High Resolution
CCD Camera

Lens

Droplet

Neutral Density
Filter
HeNe interference

\

Flame

Top view

\

Data Translation

DETAIL A

SVHS VCR

Figure 1

A

e

P
a
Y

Figure 3

Figure 2
58

