N96- 15586
FLAME

SPREAD

OVER SOLID

FUEL IN LOW-SPEED

CONCURRENT

FLOW

James S. T'ien,* Kurt R. Sacksteder, + Paul V. Ferkul, # Paul S. Greenberg, +
Ching-Biau Jiang,* and Richard D. Pettegrew*
*Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106
+NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135
#Analex Corporation,

Brookpark,

Ohio

44142

Introduction
This research program is concerned with the effect of low speed flow on the spreading and extinction
processes of flames over solid fuels. Primary attention is given to flame propagation in concurrent flow - the
more hazardous situation from the point of view of fire safety. Support for the theoretical modeling effort and
ground-based experiments was awarded in 1990. In 1994, the project was awarded flight experiment definition
stalxls.

Concurrent-Flow

Flame Spread Modeling with Gas-Phase Radiation

In a recent paper, [1] a model of flame spread and extinction ovor thin solid fuel in concurrent flow was
describedthat uses an elliptic formulsfion in the leading-edge, flame-stabilization zone and includes a solid
surface radiative loss. This model was used to study flame spreading chamcteri_cs
and derailed flame profiles
in low-speed forced flow. In addition, a flammability boundm7 which consists of a Iow-sIX_ radiafively
quenched branch and a high-speed residence-time-limited blowoff braneh was established.
More recently gas-phase radiation was introduced into the flame spreading model. [2'3] The radiation model
considers gray emitting, absorbing, and non-scauering medium (CO2 and H20). The equation of radiative
transfer is solved numerically by the S-N discrete ordinates method. A two-dimensional S4 (12 ordinates)
scheme is adopted based on a balance of numerical accuracy and computational cost after extensive numerical
testing. The major results of this model computation include:
1) Radiative heat flux is multi-dimensional in nature, and the S-N discrete ordinates method provides a netradiative-flux vector field in the gas phase. In fig. 1, for example, the net-radiative-flux vectors are shown for a
flame spreading over a thin cellulosic fuel in a 5 cm/sec concmrent flow of a mixtvsc of 15% oxygen-85%
ni_'ogen. To model flame spread, an accurate directional radiative flux field is needed to evaluate the radiative
interaction between the gas phase and the fuel smface.
2) Using fuel properties of a thin cellulosic fuel, the radiative flux from the gas phase to the surface is always
smaller than the surface emissions, as illustrated in fig. 2 (same conditions as fig. 1.) Ultimately, because the
flame is optically thin, the net radiative flux from the solid surface is lost to the surroundings.
3) Gas-phase radiation losses lower the flame tempemuu_ for flames in low-speed flows, especially in the
downstream flame zone. Lower temperatures shorten the reaction zone and the visible flame. The shorter
flames compare better with experimental results than predictions obtained without the gas-phase radiation IOSS.[4]
4) Gas-phase radiation influences the behavior of concurrent flow flame spreading from the low-spe_
quenching fimit to the high-speed blowoff limit Figure 3 shows a comparison of flame spread rates with and
wkhout gas-phase radiation. In the low-speed limit radiative losses from the gas phase cause the quenching limit
to occur at a higher flow velocity than with surface losses alone, but the high-speed blowoif limit occurs at
essentially the same velocity with or without gas-phase radiation. Extinction is controlled by processes occurring
in the flame-stab'dizadon zone, where the flow first meets the flame. [E Here the relative importance of gas-

219

phase radiation increases with decreasing flow velocity. At low speeds gas-phase radiation reduces the flame
temperatm_, eventually quenching. At higher speeds gas-phase radiation is not important in this zone and flame
stabilization is de_
by reactant residence times. Hence, theae is little difference in the two predicted
blowoff limits. Flame spread rates in concm'rent flow, however, depend on the integrated heat flux to the fuel
over the preheating and pyrolysis zones. As pyrolysis and preheating lengths increase with flow speed, the
volume of radiating species (in otw case, CO2 and H20 ) increases, amplifying the radiative feedback to the solid.
The effect of increased heat transfer to the fuel overpowers the effect of radiative reductions in the flame
teanpeman¢, producing a net increase in spread rate. As shown in fig. 3, for free-stream velocities above 5
cm/sec, the spread rate is higher with gas-phase radiation. Hence, unlike flame spread in opposed flows, [6' 71
where gas-phase radiation is important only at lower speeds, flames in concurrent flows can be influenced by
gas-phase radiation throughout the flammable flow velocity range.
5) A U-shaped flammability map using oxygen fraction and flow velocity has been consuucted for concurrentflow flame spreading. The shape of the boundary is similar to the one detemfined by ll1 based on surface
radiative loss alone, but quantitatively the boundaxy is shifted because of the effects of gas-phase radiation.
6) With gas-phase radiation included in the model steady-state flame propagation can always be achieved in
low-speed flows (fig. 4). With surface radiation alone, the flame spread rate increases quickly as surface
emissivky is decreased. At this time, numeric! difficulty r-"reven_ _
m
de.ttmnining if steady spread is
possible for the adiabatic case.

Droptower

Experiments

The first experiments on concurrent-flow flame spread over a thin solid fuel (Kimwipe tissue) were
performed in 5-second droptower tests using a fuel-sample translation device. [4] In this series of experiments,
direct photographs of visible flames provided the only basis for validating the numerical model These tests
showed that steady slate was not obtained during the 5-second test time. While we cannot do much about the
transient state of the flames in the dmptower, a number of new features were subsequently added for a second
set of tests to improve the procedure and the scope of data recorded: Is]
1) A new fuel-sample translation device driven by a stepping motor. "I'nlschange improves the control of the
sample tnmslafion speed (and the equivalent relative flow speed).
2)

The camera is mounted on the lranslafion device and follows the flame, improving the quality of the image.

3) A blinking light in the chamber illuminates the sample providing images of the pyrolysis and burnout fronts.
The two-dimensionality of these features can be checked to verify the comparison to the two-dimensional model.
4)

Gas-phase and surface temperatures were measured using thermocouples

in several tests.

5) The pea'formance of two ignition methods were studied: one using a sezpentine heated wire and the other
using a slraight heated wire atigmented w_th a nilrocellnlosic doped strip.
The second test-series results show that the serpentine ignitor produces a unifoan pyrolysis and burnout
front while the nitrocellulosic strip produces a nonuniform pyrolysis front at ignition that evolves toward
uniformity, but only in higher speed flows. The time history of pyrolysis and btlrilout fronts _
the earlier
conclusion that steady state is not reached in these experiments. The thennocouple (0.076ram wire) distorts the
flame front for this thin fuel, because of heat loss to the thennoconple.
The temperature measurements are affected by the thermocouples' proximity to the ignition source (unavoidable since the flame spreads only a short distance in 5 seconds). Nevertheless, the teanperamre data are consistent with the model's predictions indicating peak measured flame temperatures in the flame stabilization zone

220

near the solid burnout poinL Measured and calculated peak temperalnres are well below the adiabatic flame
temperature, consistent with the predicted importance of radiative heat loss.

Glovebox Experiments
The Forced Flow Flame-Spread Test (FFFI') is a Glovebox experiment for studying concurrent-flow flame
spreading being prepared for both the United States Microgravity Payload Mission (USMP-3) and the ShuttleMir Science Project (PRIRODA). In these space-flight _ts,
the lime limilalion encounte_d in the droptower _
is eliminated. However, the fixed almospheric environment
intheGlovebox (cabin air) and the
limited diagnostic and data acqnisition capability constrain the scope of these tests. The objective of these tests
will be to observe the effect of flow velocity and bulk fuel temperatm_ on the flammability, ignition, flame
growth and _g
behavior, in preparation for a more complete space-flight experiment program descn'bed
below.
The FFFT flight hardware consists of a miniature low-speed wind tunnel (derived from the Wire Insulation
Flammability experiment that was flown aboard the Shuttle spacelab in 1992) a control box and replaceable test
samples, all shown in fig. 5. The test module provides flow control and conditioning, bulk velocity meastwements, thermocouple temperatm'e displays and optical access for photography. The front window of the module
contains temFaatm_ and unemomet_ displays to be includedn thevideoimageswiththeflames, nd the
the
i
a
window opens for replacing fuel samples.
Two types of fuel will be flown during the USMP-3 mission: flat paper samples lying in a plane parallel to
the flow will be ignited in various air-flow velocities, and cylinders of cellulose formed around an electricallyheated ceramic core will be ignited at different bulk-fuel tempcmlmes. The cylindrical geometry minimizes the
mass of fuel required for heated samples and provides a simpie method of uniform sample heating.
For the MIR/PRIRODA mission, four flat paper samples of different thickness will be _
According to
computed results for thermally thin fuels, [3] there is a critical fuel thickness, x_, above which the flame structure
is independent of thickness and where spread rate varies inversely with thickness. Below xe, flames shrink and
finally quench when the fuel becomes too thin. This series of tests is intended to validate some of these

predictions.

Space Flight Experiment

Hardware Definition

The proposed space flight experiment SIBAL (Solid Inflammability Boundary At Low-Speed) is intended to
observe the flammability boundary and flame-slxeading charactefi_cs of thin solid fuel (paper sample) in lowspeed, forced-concurrent flow. In order to determine the extinction limit efficiently, a solid fuel delivery
system/wind tunnel device has been conceived that continuously feeds solid fuel m maimmn the burnout location
of a lengthy fuel sample (and therefore the flame) at a fixed location in the wind tunnel. The spreading flame,
f'Lxedwith respect to the laboratory, will facilitate diagnostic
measurements, save space, and make it poss_le to
conduct a series of experiments quickly without changing fuel samples.
To demonsuate the feasibility of this concept, a prototype device was constructed (see fig. 6). This device
is operated inside an existing apparatus providing aUnespheric control, rainbow-schlieren imaging, data acquisition, and experiment conlrol capabilities. [9] The first reduced-gravity tests of the prototype were completed in a
recent NASA KC-135 low-gravity flight campaign. The solid-fuel feeding mechanism so_y
maintained
flames at a flied location, indicated by the sclflieren photograph, shown in fig 7. of a flame spreading over an
asldess fliter paper sample in a 5cm/sec flow of a 18% oxygen/82% nitrogen mix_e.
As is often the case in
parabolic
aircraft experiments at reduced gravity, the flame was disturbed by the unsteady acceleration
environment (g-jitter), limiting the completeness of comparisons with the thenretical results. Nevertheless, to
illustratethe type of comparison that can be made using the _
SIBAL experiment results, fig.7 includes a

221

contour plot of density gradients, directly related to the schlienm imagery, c_mpu_l
18% oxygen.

Future

for the same conditions of

5_/sec.

Plans

During the next year we will pursue several parallel efforts: 1) Continue the imlxovement
and extension of
the modelling effort including _
of cylindrical geomea7
and tnmsieat calculalioas,
2) comple_
the
hardware developmem and perform the FFFT Olovebox
experiments aboard the Shuttle (USMP-3) and the
Space Se_on; 3) continue the development of prototype hardware for the SIBAL flight expe_riment; and 4)
prepare and compleW a Science Concepts Review forthe SIBAL flight experimenL

References
I.

Ferkul, E V. and T'ien, J. S., "A Model

of Low-Speed

Concurrent

Flow Flame Spread Over a Thin Fuel,"

Combustion Scienceand Technology,99, 4-6,pp.345-370,(1994).
2.

Jiang,C.-B. and T'ie_,J. S.,"Numerical Computation of Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid inForced
Concurrent Flow with Gas-Phase Radiation,"
FallTechnicalMeeting,Eastern StatesSeclionof The
Combustion Institute,
Clearwater Beach, Florida,
December 5-7 (1994).

3.

Jiang,C.-B.,"A Model of Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid in Concurrent Flow with Flame Radiation,"
Ph.D. Thesis, Dept. of Mechankal
and _
Engineering,
Case Wes_rn Reserve Univ., May, 1995.

4.

5.

Grayson, O. D., Sacks_,
IC R., Fedml, P. V., _d
Low Speed ConcurrentFlow: Dml_wer
_
Science and Techno/ogy, VII/2, pp.187-195,
(1994).
T'ien, J. S., "The Flame Front _
C.omlmstkm

6.

WA/HT-49
Allenkirch,

7.

Micn_ty,"
g/gg Pros. Amo. Aero., 130, pp.723-740, (1990).
Chea, C. H. and Cheng, M. C., "Gas-Phase Radiative Effects on Downward Flame Spread in Low Gravity,"

(1986).
R. A. and Bhaltacharjee,

T'iea, J. S., "Flame Spreading Over a Thin Fuel in
Results md Comj
with Theory,"M_'ro&rav_
in Low-Reynolds-Number

S., "Oplmse_Flow

Flow," ASME Paper 86-

Flame Spread with Implications

for Combustion

in

Combu.u_n Sc/enceand Techno/oo, 97, pp.63-83,(1994).
Pettegrew, 1L D., "Ignition and Transient Effects of Flame Spread Over a "I'nin Fuel in Low-Speed
ConcurrentFlow Using Drop_wer
Facilities', S. Thesis,Dept. of Mechanical and _
M.
Engineer-

8.

ing, Case Western Reserve Univ., May, 1995.
_,K.
R.,and T'ien, J. S., "Buoyant Downward

9.

Gravity Accelerations,"

TwenfpF_th

Sy_

Diffusion

(Inzema_nal)

Flame Spread and Extinction

on CombuaHon,

Fig.

1.

in Partial

to appear (1995).

Nondimensional

radiative

flux

vectors at 15% 0 2 and U..--5 cm/s (1 unit =
or. 4 = 0.011 cal/tan2/s).

o
>-

222

........

i

........

I

........

i

.....

Fig.2. Heat fluxes IJ_solid
on
including
cood_dve fluxqc,incominggasradiativ=
flux (ck)i., ou_oing surfac_ ritisiive flux
(_)o_. net radi_'v¢ tlux (ck)_, and net heat
flux Cl_ at 15% O 2 and U,=5 cm/s.

o" -0.2

F'_I. 3. '1_ elieci ci las zudiadonon tlamo

sprcad at
_
iSSo2.

Fig. The effect
4.
ofsolid
fuel
e.anissivity
on
flan_
slxmul
ra=fo¢lhec(m-eslx)nding
_
withand _
gas radiation 15% 0 2
at
and UR::4.58
cm/s.

E

inn

m

"

,lil_

.......

, ..............

• lil_

0.0

0.2

0.4
,_lld

0.6
emi,_ivily,

0.8

1.0

_:

223

Fig. 5. FFFT (Forced Flow Flamespread Test) Glovebox Hardware

- __

- -- - - - ----Fig. 7. Comparisonof experimentalrainbow schlieren
image of refractive index gradients and computed
contours of density gradKnts (18% 0 . cds).
,5

1 cm

Fig. 6. Solid Fuel Delivery System prototype.
Fuel advances to maintain the burnout location
in the centered circular rainbow schlieren window.

