IGNITION,

TRANSITION,

FLAME

SPREAD

CONFIGURATIONS

TAKASHI

KASHIWAGI,

National

Institute

IN MICROGRAVITY

William E. Mell, Kevin B. McGrattan,

of Standards
•

IN MULTIDIMENSIONAL

and Technology,

Gaithersburg,

Howard

R. Baum

Maryland

°

Sandra L. Olson
NASA Lewis Research

Center,

Cleveland,

Ohio

and

, •7

/

"__

Osamu Fujita, Masao Kikuchi, Kenichi Ito
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan

Introduction
Ignition

of solid fuels by external

thermal

radiation

and subsequent

transition

to flame spread

are processes

that not only are of

considerable scientific interest but which also have fire safety applications. A material which undergoes a momentary
ignition might
be tolerable but a material which permits a transition to subsequent flame spread would significantly
increase the fire hazard in a
spacecraft.
Therefore, the limiting condition under which flame cannot spread should be calculated from a model of the transition
from ignition instead of by the traditional
approach based on limits to a steady flame spread model.
However, although the
fundamental processes involved in ignition have been suggested tz.2jthere have been no def'mitive experimental
or modeling studies
due to the flow motion generated by buoyancy near the heated sample surface.
Almost all previous works have studied ignition and flame spreading separately t3.4.51. In previous flame spread studies, timedependent flame spread models are limited to upward flame spread over a vertically oriented material surface in normal gravity which
is generally assumed to be two-dimensional.
Alrfiost all detailed flame spread models t6.7.sjwere based on a steady-state flame spread
rate and, as far as we are aware, there are no previous studies of three-dimensional
time-dependent
flame spread which is initiated
from a small, localized ignited area. This scenario is most common in real fires. Thus, the study of localized ignition and the
subsequent
transition to flame spread in multidimensional
configurations
in a microgravity
environment
is needed to obtain new
information for understanding
transition and flame growth mechanisms.
Smoldering
(non-flaming
glowing combustion)
is one of the common modes of initiation of fires; it might provide potentially
hazardous conditions due to its high CO yield, but there are only a limited number of studies available in microgravity,
in particular
for surface smoldering phenomena. Although the heat release rate from smoldering is smaller than that from flaming, the temperature
of the smoldering front is as high as 800 °C or more and the induced buoyant flow velocity from the high temperature
smoldering
front is roughly 20 cm/s in normal gravity. Since the supply of oxygen to the smoldering front is one of the critical parameters which
control smoldering spread rate, it is expected that surface smoldering growth behavior at slow external flow of up to 5 cm/s in
microgravity
could be significantly
different from that in normal gravity.
In this study, microgravity
experiments which required longer test times such as in air and surface smoldering
experiments were
conducted
in the space shuttle STS-75 flight; shorter experimental
tests such as in 35% and 50% oxygen were conducted
in the
droptower in the Japan Microgravity Center, JAMIC. Their experimental data along with theoretically calculated results from solving
numerically the time-dependent
Navier-Stokes
equations are summarized in this paper.
Experimental

Description

The experimental
the test section.
used to ignite a
measured during

and Results

module, shown schematically
in Figure 1, uses a small fan to generate a low flow velocity of up to 6.5 cm/s through
The test section is 85 mm wide k 95 mm high x 171 mm long. A near-infrared
tungsten/halogen
radiant heater is
circular area in the center part of a sample in the three-dimensional
configuration.
The power to the lamp was
each test and it was turned off after ignition at a preset time. The emission spectrum of the lamp was measured from

411

2 to 20 p.m using a FTIR. A 10 cm x 8.7 cm sheet of Whatman 44 _ ashless filter paper was used as the sample. The center part ol
the sheet over the irradiated area was blackened to increase absorption of the incident beam from the lamp. The samples were ignited
at a central location either by the focused beam from the lamp (three-dimensional
configuration) or along a line by a heated wire tc
observe planar flame growth (two-dimensional
configuration).
A few samples were doped with a smolder promoting agent,
potassium acetate, to study smolder propagation from a central ignition point.
Six 0.05 mm diameter type K thermocouples
and
an ignitor wire (30 gauge Kanthal wire) were pre-installed across the sample on each sample holder.
Four thermocouples
were
installed in the sample at the center, 2 cm and 4 cm downstream from the center and at 2 cm upstream. Two thennocouples
were
installed at 2 mm above the sample surface at 2 cm upstream and also at 2 cm downstream locations from the center. Color video
pictures were taken in the direction normal to the sample surface to view changes in the flame shape and char pattern. Red diodes
were used to illuminate the sample surface. Still color photographs were taken at an oblique angle to the sample by a motor-driven
35 mm camera.
Ignition was achieved in all tests using either a heated wire or a lamp. Radiative ignition by the lamp was quite reproducible
and the
results show that the ignition delay time was not significantly affected (within 10%) by the external flow velocities used in this study.
The ignition delay time was 4.4 + 0.4s in air, 4.2 +0.3s in 35% oxygen, and 3.8 ± 0.2s in 50% oxygen. These ignition delay times
included about 2.2s from power on to a point where the output of the lamp reached the designated flux. Ignition by a heated wire
was less reproducible than that by the lamp due to changes in wire contact with the sample caused by the expansion of the wire as
it heated. Ignition tended to occur at one face of the sample surface at first followed by the second ignition on the other face of the
sample. The second ignition occurred very quickly in 50% oxygen but it took several seconds in air.
The transition from ignition to flame spread occurred in quiescent 35% and 50% oxygen but it did not occur in quiescent air. In
the two-dimensional
configuration, the transition from ignition to downstream flame spread never occurred; only the transition to
upstream spread took place. This is clearly seen for the case in air at the external flow velocity of 5 cm/s as shown in Fig.2. In air,
the color of the flame was blue and it became somewhat orange in 35% and 50% oxygen. The brightness and the length of the flame
increased with an increase in oxygen concentration
and also in external flow velocity. The tail of the flame extended further
downstream
and char was even formed downstream near the initially ignited region. However, downstream
sample temperatures
measured by thermocouples
did not exceed over about 330 °C compared to about 500 °C for upstream sample temperatures beneath
the traveling upstream flame front. In the three-dimensional
configuration, the flame spread pattern was strongly affected by oxygen
concentration

and flow velocity.

In air, at 0.5 cm/s, a small flame spread only upstream

maintaining

the initial flame shape from

shortly after ignition. The flame never grew laterally from its initial width and this is also clearly seen in the growth pattern of char
in Fig. 3a. However, the flame and char growth patterns did grow laterally outward with an increase in the external velocity, as
shown in Figs 3b and 3c. At 2 cm/s, the flame had a crescent shape and the char growth pattern was initially an elongated circle
pointing upstream; at later times, it became fan-shaped.
At 6.5 cm/s, the shape of the flame became like a horseshoe with the tails
of the horseshoe flame extending downstream.
The char pattern became a circle elongated in the upstream direction with a relatively
fiat downstream side. A similar shape was also observed in 35% and 50% oxygen concentrations
at 5 cm/s external flow velocity.
A major difference in flame shape between air in this study and 50% oxygen concentration
is that a spreading spherical flame was
observed
in a quiescent condition
in 50% oxygen concentration
compared with no transition to flame spread in the air case.
Therefore, at low external velocities, the char patterns were more or less spherical in 50% oxygen concentration
instead of the narrow
strip char pattern observed in the air case. The observed trend of opening the angle of the char pattern in the upstream direction with
an increase in extemal flow velocity of air in microgravity is quite different from the narrowing angle trend of the down stream flame
with an increase in external flow velocity in no.rrn,al gravity. However, it is expected that further increase in external velocity in
microgravity would eventually reduce the upstream flame spread rate and be sufficient to promote downstream flame spread. Thus,
this observed trend of the char pattern is unique and should occur only at low external flow velocities and low oxygen concentrations,
such as in air, in microgravity.
The histories of the location of the char front spreading upstream along the centerline could be fit reasonably well by linear equations
with time.
Thus, apparently
steady-state-like
upstream char front spread rates along the centerline
were obtained for each
experiment.
The results are shown in Fig.4.
Some caution is needed in comparing the results between the two-dimensional
configuration and the three-dimensional
configuration
due to the transient nature of the three-dimensional
flame and there are not
sufficient data for the case in air in the two-dimensional
configuration.
The results show that the upstream char spread rate appears

JCertaincompany productsare mentioned in the text in orderto specify adequately the experimentalprocedureand equipmentused. In no
cases does such identification imply recommendation or endorsementby the National Institute of Standards and Technology and NASA, nor
does it imply that the products are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

412

toreach plateau flowvelocity of
a
inthe
range

about 5 - 10 cm/s, where the spread rate becomes independent of the external flow
velocity tg]. Although the difference between the two-dimensional
configuration
and the three-dimensional
configuration
in 50%
oxygen is within the scatter of the data, the results in 35% oxygen indicate that the spread rate in the three-dimensional
configuration
is faster than in the two-dimensional
configuration
due possibly to a larger oxygen supply at the curved flame front. In the regime
where oxygen supply is the critical rate-controlling
process, a curved flame front has a larger area for incoming oxygen to reach.
This could be more clearly seen in air but unfortunately
there were not enough data in the two-dimensional
configuration.
Some
care is needed to make sure to generate a planar flame in the two-dimensional
configuration.
If a planar flame is not generated, the
result is instead a three-dimensional
configuration.
Four smoldering experiments
were conducted in the space shuttle STS-75 with ignition initiated at the center of the sample by the
lamp. The sample was doped with potassium ions to enhance char formation and char oxidation (4.2 weight % +5% in spatial nonuniformity).
Although a ring-shaped
smoldering
front was initially observed in normal gravity (the ring-shaped
front gradually
deformed due to induced buoyant flow from the hot smoldering surface), unexpected, very complex f'mger-shaped char patterns with
localized smoldering fronts at the f'mger tips were observed in microgravity;
such patterns are seen in Fig.5. In these pictures, the
white spots are the localized smoldering
fronts. The direction of growth of the char pattern was mainly upstream;
higher external
flow velocity tends to increase the number of localized smoldering
fronts, the number of fingers, and also the frequency
of
bifurcations from each f'mger. At present it is not clear what caused this complex pattern.
The flame spread behavior along the open edges of the paper sample was studied at external flow velocities of 2, 3, and 5 cm/s in
air using a narrow sample, 4 cm in width, in the same sample holder. Ignition was achieved by the lamp illuminating the center of
the sample; initially, the flame spread radially upstream. Once the flame reached the open edges of the sample, the flame at each edge
spread much more rapidly than the flame along the center line. At the open edges of the sample, oxygen supply to the flame (almost
360 °) and energy feedback from the flame to the sample (from three sides) are much larger than that for the flame along the center
of the sample (about 180 ° for oxygen supply and only two sides for energy feedback).
Theoretical

Calculation

A complete description
of the mathematical
model has been given in Ref. [ 10]. The gas phase is governed by the conservation
equations of mass, momentum,
energy and species (fuel gases and oxygen) under low Mach number combustion and heat transfer
conditions. In past work (two-dimensional
configuration),
it was assumed that the velocity field was approximated
by a potential flow
[_0._
_1.Now, the full Navier-Stokes
form of the momentum
conservation
equation (in three-dimensional
configuration)
is solved.
However, the potential flow approximation
is used to apply boundary conditions since the rapid expansion at ignition cannot be
treated properly with conventional zero gradient boundary conditions. The uniform inlet flow condition is specified at the upstream
edge of a paper sample and a boundary layer along the sample surface is calculated. The gas phase oxidation reaction is represented
by a global one step reaction characterized by a second order Arrhenius rate equation. The pre-exponential
factor is 5.0× 10 9 cm3/(g's)
and the activation energy is 67 kJ/mol. The heat of combustion is 35 kJ/g, and the stoichiometric
constant is 3.57. These values are
the same as those used in the two-dimensional
study oo1. It has been observed that the ignition and transition to flame spread are very
sensitive to the choice of the gas phase reaction constants. The present choice is guided by a desire to roughly match flame spread
rates with the experiments of Olson Is]. However, the objective of the study is not necessarily to duplicate experimental results exactly
by manipulating
the model parameters, but rather to deduce trends of the transient phenomena.
The sample used in the experiments is more thermally stable than the paper used in our previous study t_0.111. thickness is 0.13 mm,
Its
area density 5.7 mg/cm: and specific heat 0.96 J/(g.K). It is assumed that this value of specific heat applies to the char and ash, as
well, and that it increases linearly with temperature.
It is assumed that the sheet is thermally-thin
and also of uniform composition
through its depth. Radiative loss from the sample surface is included but radiation from the flame is not included in the model, and
the emissivity of the sample is estimated to be 0.6. The pyrolysis of the cellulosic sheet is described by a slightly exothermic global
pyrolysis reaction, an exothermic
global thermal oxidative degradation reaction, and an exothermic
global char oxidation reaction.
The kinetic constants for each degradation
reaction were derived with the same type of thermogravimetric
analysis used in our
previous

study [_:].

The equations for the continuity, momentum,
gas phase temperature and two species concentrations
form and solved with a simple time splitting scheme in which it is assumed that the oxidative reaction

are written in f'mite difference
occurs over a small part of the

overall time step, and the convective and diffusive terms are differenced and updated with an ADI (Alternating
Direction Implicit)
scheme. The momentum
equation is solved with a simple projection method which relies on the prescription
of the velocity field
at the boundary of the computational
domain. This boundary velocity is provided by the potential flow approximation.
A Poisson

413

equation for pressure is solved with a direct solver. For the simulations described below, the computational domain was 10 cm i_
the windward direction, 5 cm spanning half of the lateral direction and 5 cm in the normal direction. Symmetry is assumed about the
plane which is spanned by vectors normal to the paper surface and parallel to the wind direction. Also, the paper itself is assumed
to be a plane of symmetry.
A typical grid contains about 260,000 cells (128x64x32),
and the calculations require about 48 hours ol
CPU time on a current generation workstation for a 5 second simulation of the events.
A typical result of flame spread behavior in a 33% oxygen atmosphere
in the two-dimensional
configuration
is shown in Fig.6. The
sample is ignited at the center part of the sample by a prescribed external radiant flux distribution (similar to the experimentally used
lamp in the three-dimensional
configuration) across the sample. At a quiescent condition and 1 cm/s flow, no transition fi'om ignition
to flame is achieved in the calculation. From 2 cm/s to 12 cm/s flow, the Iransition is achieved and steady flame spread is calculated
only toward upstream which is the same Irend as that observed in the experiment as shown in Fig.2. The char pattern shown in Fig.2
is very similar to that shown in Fig.6. The calculated upstream char spread rate with respect to external flow velocity is shown in
Fig.7. From about 5 cm/s to 12 cm/s flow, the char spread rate is nearly independent of external flow velocity and this trend is
consistent with the data shown in Fig.4 and previous experimental results ts). In a atmosphere of quiescent 50% oxygen in the threedimensional
configuration, the results show a flame of initially hemispherical
dome shape. The top part of the flame eventually
opens as it propagates
far from the ignited area in the outward direction t131. Although this behavior of the flame appears to be
reasonable, the opening of the top part of the flame was not observed due to lack of available test time, 10s, in the droptower.
At
5 cm/s flow, the initial shape of the flame is similar to the quiescent case since the flow field is dominated
by the rapid thermal
expansion of the flaming ignition. However, after ignition the external flow begins to reshape the flame into a horseshoe pointed
into the imposed flow as shown in Fig.8. The calculated char pattern for this case is similar to that shown in Fig. 3c but the flame in
50°6 oxygen is much brighter than that in air. The history of the upstream char front in 33% and 50% oxygen concentration
in the
three-dimensional
configuration
shows nearly linear growth with time after the transition from ignition. The relationship between
the calculated
upstream char spread rate and external flow velocity is shown in Fig.7. The symbols with a x mark indicate that
ignition and some transition occurred but the flame died before spreading beyond the irradiated area. A comparison
of the upstream
char spread rate between the two-dimensional
configuration
and the three-dimensional
configuration
indicates a trend in which, at
low external flow velocities, only the three-dimensional
configuration
appears to favor the transition and subsequent flame spread.
This trend is similar to the case for 35% oxygen shown in Fig.4. However, the difference in the char spread rate between the twodimensional configuration and the three-dimensional
configuration
is very small with the values of the gas phase kinetic constants
used in this study. This difference tends to become less at higher oxygen concentration
such as in 50% oxygen as shown in Figs. 4
and 7. In order to confirm this trend further, calculation at lower oxygen concentration
is planned.
Also, a proposal was written to
conduct more experiments
in the two-dimensional
configuration
in air.
Acknowledament_
This study is supported

by the NASA

Microgravity

experiments were funded by the New Energy
Utilization Promotion Center.
References

Science Program under the Inter-Agency
and Industrial

1. Kashiwagi, T. Fire Safety J. 3: 185-200(1981 ).
2. Muto, N., Hirano, T. and Akita, K. Seventeenth Symposium
Pittsburgh, 1183-1190(I 978).
3. Bhattacharjee, S and Altenkirch,
Pittsburgh,
1627-1633(1990).
4.Frey, A.E. and Tien, J.S., Combust.
5. Olson, S.L. Combust.

Flame, 36:263

Sci. Tech. 76:233-249

6. Di Blasi, C., Crescitelli,
128(1989).
7. Bhattacharjee,

R.A. Twenty-Third

S. and Russo,

S., Altenkirch,

(International)

Symposium

Agreement

Development

on Combustion,

(International)

No. C-32001-R.

Organization

The Combustion

on Combustion,

The JAMIC

through the Japan Space

Institute,

TheCombustion

Institute,

-289(1979).

(1991).

G. Fire Safety Science-

A., Srikantaiah,

8. Ferkul, P.V. and Tien, J.S. Combust.

Technology

Proceedings

N., and Vedhanayagam,

of the Second

M. Combust.

International

Symposium,

p119-

Sci. Tech. 69:1-15(1990).

Sci. Tech. 99_345-370(1994).

9. de R.is, J.N., Twe.[ih Symposium
(International)
on Combustion,
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, pp.241-252(1969)
10. Nakabe, K., McGrattan, K.B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum, H.R., Yamashita, H., and Kushida, G., Combust. Flame,
98:361-374(1994)
I I. McGrattan, K.B., Kashiwagi,
T., Baum, H.R., and Olson, S.L., Combust. Flame, 106:377-391(1996).
12. Kashiwagi,
13.Kashiwagi,

T. and Nambu,
T., McGrattan,

H., Combust.

Flame,

88:345-368(t992).

K.B., Olson, S.L., Fujita, O., Kikuchi,

Ignition and Transition to Flame Spread in Microgravity"
The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, (1997).

M., and Ito, K.,"Effects

to be published

414

in Twenty-sixth

of Slow Wind on

Symposium

Localized

(International)

Radiative

on Combustion,

Ra_ml

I.leal

er Um'bD i,lem,de

<_.--_.
u

FlOw

.<.___.__

Figure

1 Schematic

cross section

view of hardware

mE

2:24:.1.2
Fig. 2: Experimental
from right

Fig. 3b: Experimental
flow from right

2D spread

in air, 5 cm/s flow
Fig. 3a: Experimental
flow from right

3D spread

in air,

Fig. 3el: Experimental
cm/s flow from right

2 cm/s

415

3D spread

3D spread

in air, 0.5 cm/s

in air,

6.5

I

I

I

!

0.g
o
°.°o"

0.8

0"

•

O

""

0.7

|
o,°

..........

0.6

?-:J
t

I
.,,..
.," •

I

I

-_. 0.4
0
I

•
air
(2D)
-(3-- air (3D)
--A-- 35% O= (2D)

0.3
02

J

- -'*'-" 35% 02 (3D)
_J

•

J

0

,

I

2

4

i

I

,

6

Extomal

50% 02 (2D)

Fig.5:

Smoldering

0

0.1

5o% 0 2 (3D)

fronts

in air,

1

,

8

Flow Velocity

!

char

2 cm/s

pattern

flow

Experimental

upstream

char

with

smoldering

right

,

10

12

(ChriS)
1.0

Fig.4

from

spread

rate

vs flow

I

I

velocity
x
%"

Extinction

occurred

0,8

_" o,B

0.4.
(.)

/

E
8

flow

/

•

0.00

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.B0

0.0

i

i

0

Fig. 8:20

6 mn/e (CaloulaClon)

flow

Fig.

8: Calculated

flame

and char

pattern

in 3D configuration,

416

Calculated

upstream

velocity

5 cm/s

in 50%

i

i

50%

02

o

50%

02

i

i

5
Externol

Fig.7

I

•

o

Cltar MNS FnmUon

a 33% 02 (so)

•

1.IX)

* 33% 02 (2D)

a

0.2

oxygen

Flow

char

I

(2D)
(3D)
i

,

10
Velocity

spread

(cm/s)

rate

vs external

