Soot Aerosol Properties in Laminar Soot-Emitting
Microgravity Nonpremixed Flames
BOGDAN KONSUR, CONSTANTINE M. MEGARIDIS
Department of Mechanical Engineering (MIC 251), University of Illinois at Chicago, 842 W. Taylor Street,
Chicago, 1L 60607-7022, USA

and

DEVON W. GRIFFIN

(^>&/tf

Microgravity Fluid Physics Branch, MS 110-3, NASA Lewis Research Center, 25000 Brookpark Rd.,
Cleveland, OH 44135, USA
The spatial distributions and morphological properties of the soot aerosol are examined experimentally in a
series of 0-g laminar gas-jet nonpremixed flames. The methodology deploys round jet diffusion flames of
nitrogen-diluted acetylene fuel burning in quiescent air at atmospheric pressure. Full-field laser-light extinction
is utilized to determine transient soot spatial distributions within the flames. Thermophoretic sampling is
employed in conjunction with transmission electron microscopy to define soot microstructure within the
soot-emitting 0-g flames. The microgravity tests indicate that the 0-g flames attain a quasi-steady state roughly
0.7 s after ignition, and sustain their annular structure even beyond their luminous flame tip. The measured
peak soot volume fractions show a complex dependence on burner exit conditions, and decrease in a nonlinear
fashion with decreasing characteristic flow residence times. Fuel preheat by ~140 K appears to accelerate the
formation of soot near the flame axis via enhanced fuel pyrolysis rates. The increased soot presence caused by
the elevated fuel injection temperatures triggers higher flame radiative losses, which may account for the
premature suppression of soot growth observed along the annular region of preheated-fuel flames. Electron
micrographs of soot aggregates collected in 0-g reveal the presence of soot precursor particles near the
symmetry axis at midflame height. The observations also verify that soot primary particle sizes are nearly
uniform among aggregates present at the same flame location, but vary considerably with radius at a fixed
distance from the burner. The maximum primary size in 0-g is found to be by 40% larger than in 1-g, under the
same burner exit conditions. Estimates of the number concentration of primary particles and surface area of
soot particulate phase per unit volume of the combustion gases are also made for selected in-flame locations.
© 1999 by The Combustion Institute

INTRODUCTION
Nonbuoyant flames offer a relatively unexplored platform to improve understanding of
soot mechanisms [1]. The effects of buoyancy
are eliminated temporarily in drop towers,
which sustain brief intervals of reduced gravity—typically lower than 10"3 g—extending up to
several seconds at a time. Such an environment
is referred to as microgravity or 0-g. Microgravity facilities have been employed [2] to show
that nonbuoyant hydrocarbon flames are longer,
wider, and sootier than their normal-gravity
counterparts.
Mortazavi et al. [3] established that residence times in microgravity laminar jet nonpremixed flames with Re — O(100) tend to be
Corresponding author. E-mail: cmm@uic.edu
COMBUSTION AND FLAME 118:509-520 (1999)
© 1999 by The Combustion Institute
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.

proportional to burner diameter and inversely proportional to burner exit velocity. This
offers great flexibility in altering residence
times in these flames by manipulating the
burner exit diameters and velocities. Conversely, flame residence times in the corresponding normal-gravity flames are rather
limited, since they are controlled largely by
buoyancy.
The soot-field structure within laminar microgravity gas-jet nonpremixed flames has
been examined by Megaridis et al. [4] for
flames operated well above their smoke point.
The fuel was nitrogen-diluted (50% vol.) acetylene burning in quiescent air at atmospheric
pressure. The work was conducted at the
2.2-second drop tower of the NASA Lewis
Research Center (NASA-LeRC). As reported
in [4], the soot fields in 0-g sustained a
0010-2180/99/$-see front matter
PII 50010-2180(99)00021-8

This report is a preprint of an article submitted to a journal for
publication. Because of changes that may be made before formal
publication, this preprint is made available with the understanding
that it will not be cited or reproduced without the permission of the
author.

510

pronounced annular structure throughout the
luminous nonbuoyant-flame zone. This finding establishes that the annular structure of
the soot field in laminar coflow nonpremixed
flames is not caused by buoyancy. In [4], the
maximum soot volume fraction measured at
0-g was nearly a factor of 2 higher than that at
1-g. A follow-up study by the same investigators [5] examined the effect of moderate fuel
preheat on the structure of the soot fields.
Greenberg and Ku [6] presented identical
trends for flame conditions similar to those
considered in [4]. The above studies [4-6]
clearly demonstrated the improved spatial
resolution afforded in microgravity flames
compared to their normal-gravity counterparts. Just recently, the first long-duration 0-g
experimental study of soot processes was performed in space [7]. The work produced a
wealth of experimental data, which included
luminous flame shapes, soot concentration
distributions, soot and gas temperature distributions, soot structure, and flame radiation.
The above set of measurements was performed at atmospheric and half-atmospheric
pressure.
The present work extends the 0-g flame soot
mea- surements reported in [4] and [5], by
adding new 0-g data for different fuel flow
rates and burner diameters. Some measurements, which ap- peared in [5], are also
repeated herein for clarity and in order to
facilitate comparisons with the data obtained
for the added experimental conditions. These
new flame conditions allow more conclusive
comparisons regarding the effect of characteristic flow residence times on soot-field
structure, the influence of fuel preheat on
fuel pyrolysis rates near the flame centerline,
and the premature cessation of soot growth
along the soot annulus in 0-g when the fuel
is preheated. Furthermore, this paper reports
on the implementation of thermophoretic
soot sampling in a specific 0-g flame featuring
burner exit velocities typical of buoyant
flames, and presents quantitative data on the
radial variation of soot microstructure at a
fixed height above the burner mouth. Soot
primary particle sizes in 1-g and 0-g are also
presented and compared to previously published values.

B. KONSUR ET AL.
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS AND
METHODS
Flame Conditions
The laminar gas jet nonpremixed flames investigated in this study were operated at atmospheric pressure in a rectangular enclosure with
dimensions 30 cm X 21 cm X 43 cm. The flames
were anchored either on a 1.6 mm or 1.2 mm
inner-diameter stainless-steel burner, which was
positioned vertically in the chamber. The round
burner tip was positioned approximately 50 mm
above a flat base plate which held the nozzle
and the spark ignitor assembly. The nozzle
length-to-diameter ratio was around 55 to ensure that fully developed flow emerged from the
burner tip. The fuel mixture consisted of 50%
(volume) 0^2-50% N2 and was issued into
quiescent air at room temperature. The base
fuel flow rate of 2.2 mg/s (corresponding to a
volume flow rate of 2 cm3/s at room temperature and atmospheric, pressure) was selected as
defining flame sizes that provided adequate
resolution of the soot fields both in 1-g and 0-g,
as well as short transients after ignition in
microgravity [4]. Experiments were also conducted at two lower fuel flow rates, namely 1.2
mg/s and 1.6 mg/s. In addition to the unpreheated-fuel conditions, one preheated-fuel
configuration (fuel exit temperature of 160°C)
was examined for the base mass flow rate of
2.2 mg/s. Fuel preheat was utilized as a means
to vary the flame residence time in 0-g under
a fixed mass flow rate. Table 1 lists five burner
exit conditions for the flames studied in this
work. All burner exit conditions listed in this
table produced nonflickering flames in normal
gravity as well as within the 2.2-s period
available for measurements in microgravity.
All 1-g flames emitted no soot from their
closed conical tip, whereas their nonbuoyant
counterparts released soot from their open
tip. The smoke point of the diluted unpreheated acetylene fuel at 0-g was determined
to be in the range from 0.77 to 1.1 mg/s (0.7 to
1 cm3/s at room temperature and atmospheric
pressure). The above confirms the findings of
Urban et al. [7] who reported that the laminar
smoke point flow rates in 0-g are significantly

SOOT AEROSOL PROPERTIES IN NONBUOYANT FLAMES

511

TABLE 1

Flame Operating Conditions
Fuel Exit
Temp. (deg. C)

(mg/s)

1.6
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.6

Case

23
23
160
23
23

1.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
1.2

I
II"
IV
V
VI

[cm3/s]

Mean Exit
Velocity (cm/s)

Exit
Re

0-g
Luminous
Height (mm)

1-g
Luminous
Height (mm)

[1.5]
[2.0]
[2.9]
[2.0]
[1.1]

74.6
99.5
145.5
186.2
54.6

96
128
98
174
70

19.0
28.3
26.5
26.6
14.6

16.9
26.4
26.0
24.0
9.0

Fuel Flow rate

Burner
Diam. (mm)

' Base case.

lower than those of the buoyant flames
burning the same fuel. As suggested in [4]
and verified in [7], this is a result of the
extended residence times in 0-g which cause
prolonged growth without compensating
increases in soot oxidation. The cessation of
the soot oxidation processes in 0-g occurs
by quenching near the flame tip, as shown by
the temperature measurements reported in

Apparatus
The experimental rig is the same one used in
our previous studies [4, 5] which were conducted in the 2.2-s drop tower of the NASALeRC. Detailed information on the drop tower
facility can be found in [8]. Each microgravity
experiment lasts for 2.2 s, during which data are
collected continuously. A typical drop sequence
starts with the rig release from the top of the
tower (onset of microgravity), and proceeds
with fuel flow initiation, ignition (via spark),
flame development, and finally, impact on an
airbag at the bottom of the tower (end of
2.2-s-long microgravity period). Diagnostic instrumentation includes direct video imaging of
the flame and laser-light extinction for determination of soot volume fraction distributions (see
below). The luminous flame emission is recorded throughout each drop. Experiments are
fully automated, powered by DC current and
are controlled via an onboard computer. Further details on the experimental apparatus are
given in [4, 5] and are not repeated herein for
brevity.

Measurement of Soot Distributions via FullField Laser-Light Extinction
Soot volume fraction distributions within the
flames were determined via a full-field laserlight extinction technique [9] which is based on
principles of optical tomographic reconstruction
and is capable of determining transient soot
spatial distributions in laminar axisymmetric
flames. The capability of this technique to follow time-dependent fields is essential in microgravity flames because of their transient character after ignition in 0-g. The instrumentation for
these measurements has been described in detail in [4]. In this technique, a laser light beam
(A = 674.9 nm) is spatially filtered, expanded
and collimated to a cylinder approximately 50
mm in diameter before passing through the
soot-laden flame. Soot scatters and absorbs light
depending on the particle size, producing a
shadow-like image at the back of the flame [5].
Such images viewed by a CCD camera through
a laser-line filter are recorded at a rate of 30
frames per second and are used for data reduction after the completion of each 0-g experiment. Raw soot-field images are postprocessed
according to the techniques described in [4].
When the image frame of the soot field at a
specific instant is compared to a reference
frame taken before the flame was ignited, the
instantaneous line-of-sight fractional absorption
can be calculated after an appropriate correction for flame luminosity [4]. Typical absorption
levels in the flames investigated are of the order
of 25%, being occasionally as high as 35%, thus
satisfying the optically thin medium assumption.
From each horizontal intensity profile (Z =

512

B. KONSUR ET AL.

1.2mg/s

1.6mg/s

2.2mg/s

Fig. 1. Luminous flame images in 0-g: VI) lowest flow rate, I) intermediate flow rate, and II) highest (base) flow rate. These
images were captured after the brief initial transients in 0-g and correspond to a quasi-steady state. The illuminated burner
tip can be seen at the base of each flame image. The spark ignition wires are also visible in Flames VI and I. These wires were
in the field of view, but were positioned far enough from the flame to minimize interference with the combustion process. The
vertical scale drawn in (I) corresponds to a length of 25 mm. Photographs I and II have been reproduced from [5].

constant), the radial distribution of soot volume
fraction is determined using a three-point Abel
deconvolution algorithm [10], and Rayleigh
scattering theory with a specific value of the
refractive index of soot (1.57-0.56 i) [11]. As
discussed in [5], discrepancies between the Rayleigh approximation and the more detailed Rayleigh-Debye-Gans (RDG) scattering theory are
largest at short wavelengths (~500 nm) for
heavily sooting fuels. The moderate laser wavelength of the current work (674.9 nm) suggests
that these discrepancies are not significant, especially when compared to uncertainties in soot
refractive index [12]. The soot volume fraction
distributions reported in the following have
been symmetrized with respect to the flame axis.
Measurement of Soot Morphology via
Thermophoretic Soot Sampling and
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Soot microstructure was examined using thermophoretic sampling, a technique that has been
shown [13, 14] to provide an accurate representation of the morphological character of flameborn aerosols. This method is based on the
phenomenon of thermophoresis, which drives
the flame-born soot to the cold surface of a
precisely positioned probe, where it is ultimately
captured. The thermophoretic probe supports a
200-A-thick elemental carbon substrate that
provides a fine background for high-resolution

observations using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In summary, thermophoretic
sampling collects soot microsamples from welldefined flame coordinates, and allows subsequent morphological characterization using
TEM and image analysis techniques.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Luminous Flame Appearance
Although visible flame appearance does not
define the reaction zone in a spatial sense, it
provides a reliable means of evaluating the
transient character of flames after ignition.
Throughout this study, ignition in 0-g occurred
consistently at 0.3 s into the 2.2-s-drop sequence. As also reported in [4, 5], video observations of luminous flame zone development
showed the initial transients to be complete
about 1 s after the onset of microgravity (i.e.,
0.7 s after ignition). All flames appeared to
remain unchanged thereafter and until 1.7 s1.8 s into a 0-g experiment, when some pulsing
was caused by the established contact between
the experiment rig and the drag shield encasing
the rig.
Figure 1 displays the luminous images for
Flames VI, I, and II (see Table 1), as captured
in 0-g after the brief initial transients. The
images of I and II are reproduced from [5], and

SOOT AEROSOL PROPERTIES IN NONBUOYANT FLAMES
are repeated here to display the effect of fuel
flow rate in 0-g. As seen in this figure, the flame
streamwise dimensions appear to increase with
flow rate (left to right). It is interesting to note
that the maximum diameter of all three flames
displayed in Fig. 1 is nearly the same (6-7 mm).
This diameter was characteristic of all 0-g
flames examined in this work. As argued in [7],
the characteristic transient postignition period
of a 0-g flame can be estimated by the ratio
R2/D, where R is the maximum luminous flame
radius and D is the characteristic mass diffusion
coefficient. Considering a value of D = 40
mm2/s (characteristic of a temperature ~1050
K), we calculate a transient period of the order
of 1 s, which is consistent with our experimental
observations. The relatively short transient development times in the 0-g flames studied
herein offer these flames as suitable platforms
for soot measurements at the 2.2-s drop tower
of the LeRC. The 0-g ethylene flames studied by
Urban et al. [7], which were also based on a
1.6-mm-diameter tube burner, had a maximum
luminous diameter around 14 mm. The larger
sizes of those flames resulted in the passing of
several seconds before a quasi-steady state was
reached [7], thus requiring a space-based platform where extended periods of 0-g are available.
The luminous flame zones shown in Fig.l
display a fundamental difference between
Flame VI (flow rate 1.2 mg/s) and Flames I and
II (1.6 and 2.2 mg/s, respectively). Both Flames
I and II have an open tip with little or no soot
emitted from the centerline, whereas Flame VI
appears to contain at its tip substantial amounts
of soot near the axis. This behavior is characteristic of flames operating slightly above the
smoke point, as also discussed by Urban et al.
[7]. Although the soot-emitting character of all
0-g flames examined in this work made the
determination of a visible height a dubious task
(notice the gradual darkening of flame tip with
height in Fig. 1), a flame height was determined
as the distance between the burner tip and the
axial location where darkening of the luminous
zone started to occur. On the other hand, the
corresponding flame heights in 1-g were easier
to measure because of the closed tip of the 1-g
flames [5]. Table 1 lists the luminous flame
heights determined in this manner. Naturally,

513

luminous flame height increases with fuel flow
rate both in 0-g and 1-g. Also, for a fixed mass
fuel flow rate of 2.2 mg/s (Flames II, IV, and V),
the flame height remains insensitive to the fuel
exit conditions both in 0-g and 1-g. Furthermore, for the fuel rate of 2.2 mg/s, gravity
appears to play only a minor role in flame
height, as demonstrated by the similar values of
this quantity for Flames II, IV, and V in 0-g and
1-g. For the intermediate flow rate of 1.6 mg/s
(Case I), some difference is seen in the flame
height between 0-g and 1-g. Finally, this difference becomes even more pronounced at the
lowest flow rate 1.2 mg/s (Case VI).
0-g Soot Fields
The radial distributions of soot volume fraction
(fv) were determined at distinct axial stations
above the burner tip for the first four flames
listed in Table 1. The specific heights where
distributions were produced ranged from Z =
10 mm to 30 mm, in 5-mm increments. Comparisons of the soot fields in Flames I, II, and IV
have been reported in [5] and will not be
repeated here. In the following, soot distribution comparisons are made for Flames II, IV,
and V, in order to provide insight on the
influence of two factors, namely, fuel preheat
and characteristic flow residence times. As discussed in [5], fuel preheat by ~100 K may cause
significant changes in fuel pyrolysis rates, thus
affecting soot formation rates. Furthermore, in
jet diffusion flames burning in 0-g with Re =
O(100), residence times scale proportionally to
burner diameter and inversely proportional to
fuel exit velocity [3]. Consequently, flow residence times in Flames IV and V should be by
32% and 60% (respectively) lower than those in
the base flame (II).
Figure 2 displays the radial variations of /„ at
two selected axial heights (Z = 20 mm, 30 mm)
in Flames II, IV, and V. The distributions for
Flames II and IV are reproduced from [5] to
facilitate comparison. The location Z = 30 mm
lies slightly beyond the point defining the flame
luminous height for each flame (see Table 1).
At both heights, the soot distributions display a
well-defined annular structure, which is maintained even past the flame tip (see Fig. 2B). It is
seen, though, that the annular character of the

B. KONSUR ET AL.

514

Z = 20 mm

-

2

0

2

r (mm)
Fig. 2. Radial distributions of soot volume fraction/„ at two distinct axial stations (A at Z=20 ram; B at 30 mm) above the
burner mouth of three microgravity flames (II, IV, and V; see Table 1). These radial distributions represent the apparent
steady state of the flames following the initial soot-field transients after ignition. The distributions for II and IV have been
reproduced from [5J.

soot field near the flame tip is weaker in the
smaller-burner-diameter flame (V). Similar
confinement of the soot aerosol in an .annulus
near the flame tip was also reported by Honnery
and Kent [15] for their long ethylene/air buoyant jet diffusion flames. Therefore, the persistence of the soot annular structure beyond the
luminous flame tip cannot be attributed to the
nonbuoyant character of the flames investigated
herein, but appears to be characteristic of fuel
flow rates that are sufficiently higher than the
smoke point, irrespectively of the presence of
gravity [5]. Figure 2 clearly .shows that soot
formation occurs along the axis of the three
flames. On the other hand, the nonbuoyant
ethylene flame investigated by Urban et al. [7]
at atmospheric pressure showed no signs of soot
formation in the vicinity of the flame axis. This
difference may be caused by the larger radial

extent of the ethylene flame studied in [7], as
well as the different sooting propensity of ethylene compared to the C2H2/N2 mixture used in
the current work. Figure 2 also shows that as
fuel exit velocities increase from Flame II to IV
(see Table 1), the soot annulus moves closer to
the symmetry axis. This observation emphasizes
the importance of jet momentum in flame structure in 0-g. Finally, the soot-releasing character
of the three flames is confirmed by the nonzero
value of /„ above the flame tip (Z = 30 mm).
The gradual evolution of the soot aerosol
along two characteristic particle paths in Flames
II, IV, and V was followed by plotting fv vs. Z
along these paths. Unfortunately, due to the
unavailability of velocity fields in these 0-g
flames, a fv vs. t relationship could not be
deduced. Figure 3A displays the /„ vs. Z variation along the soot annulus; Fig. 3B follows soot

SOOT AEROSOL PROPERTIES IN NONBUOYANT FLAMES

515

(B)

(A)
ID -

15 14 1312-

Flame I[
Flame IV
Flame V

Q-g

7-

E
S 6"
B

A

•

uj
'I 5 '

A

A

c 4•
•

A

A

Flame n
Flame IV
Flame V

i

•

O)

-i e| 54321 i •
5

•
•
*

8-

o. 10 * 9-

i,':

9-

0-g

A

^

™» 3 '

•
ft

2 -

•
A

1 _

i
10

i
15

i
20

i
25

i
30

0
3

Z (mm)

1

5

-*

V

1

1

1

1

10

15

20

25

30

3

Z (mm)

Fig. 3. Comparison of the variation of soot volume fraction along: (A) the soot annulus, and (B) the flame centerline of three
0-g flames. The data points for Flames II and IV have been reproduced from [5].

transport along the symmetry axis. The data
points for Flames II and IV are reproduced
from [5] and are repeated here to facilitate
comparisons.
Figure 3A shows that the soot concentrations
in the annuli of Flames II and IV are similar
early on (Z <15 mm), suggesting a relatively
small influence of the utilized fuel preheat on
soot inception rates along the annular region.
However, the soot growth rates appear to be
slower for Flame IV. This is probably due to the
reduced residence times available for growth in
this preheated-fuel flame. The corresponding
data points for the unpreheated-fuel flames (II
and V) follow a parallel ascending/descending
trend, but the values of /„ in the base flame (II)
remain consistently higher. This disparity in
soot volume fractions—despite the same fuel
flow rate—may be due to the significantly lower
residence times of Flame V compared to the
base flame (as stated earlier, flow residence
times in Flame V are estimated to be by 60%
lower than those in Flame II). Figure 3 A also
shows that the overall maximum value of /„
declines as residence times decrease from
Flame II to V. It is worth noting, however, that
the reductions in/v do not scale with the corresponding residence tune reductions, thus attesting to the complexity of the processes involved.

It is also important to note that the peak soot
volume fraction in the preheated-fuel flame
(IV) occurs at Z = 15 mm, compared to 20 mm
in the two unpreheated-fuel flames (II and V).
The shift of (fv)max to lower heights (or likewise,
earlier residence times) has been observed in [5]
and cannot be attributed to a residence time
effect; compared to Flame II, Flame V has an
even lower residence time than Flame IV. This
shift marks an important difference between
unpreheated and preheated-fuel flames in 0-g.
A possible explanation for this shift is given in
the following paragraph.
Figure 3B reveals interestingly that soot concentrations in the flame core are very similar for
both unpreheated-fuel flames (II and V), despite the substantially differing (by —60%) residence times in these two flames. Because of the
relatively higher soot volume fractions in the
soot annulus of Flame II (see Fig. 3A), the
temperatures in that flame are expected to be
lower than those in Flame V. Thus, the sootsuppressing effect of lower temperatures in
Flame II could potentially neutralize the sootpromoting influence of longer residence times
along the axis of that flame, as compared to
Flame V. Figure 3B also shows that the soot
volume fractions along the axis of Flame IV
(preheated) are considerably higher than those

516

of the unpreheated-fuel flames. This strong
soot-enhancing influence of fuel preheat along
the flame centerline cannot be attributed to a
residence time effect, because Flame IV features shorter residence times compared to
Flame II. As suggested in [5], fuel preheat by
O(1QO K) appears to enhance fuel pyrolysis
rates in the cool flame regions, although such
preheat levels correspond to an increase in
adiabatic flame temperature of less than 10 K
(estimated by taking molecular dissociation into
consideration). In turn, enhanced fuel pyrolysis
rates accelerate the formation of soot, and may
explain the trends seen in Fig. 3B. Nevertheless,
the increased soot presence near the axis of the
preheated-fuel flame (IV) would cause higher
radiative losses, thus reducing flame temperatures and eventually suppressing soot growth
[16]. This mechanism may be responsible for the
premature (15 mm vs. 20 mm in Fig. 3A)
cessation of soot growth seen for the particles
transported along the soot annulus of the preheated fuel flame.
Soot Morphology
It has been established that soot aggregates
transported in steady buoyant laminar hydrocarbon/air nonpremixed flames consist of primary particles of approximately spherical shape
and which, for a specific location within the
flame, are of nearly uniform diameter dp [17].
However, the size of the primary particles as
well as the degree of agglomeration (quantified
by the number of primary particles per aggregate) are strongly influenced by the position
within the flame. It is noted that none of the
above findings have been verified for soot aggregates formed and transported in 0-g flames.
The relatively low gas-flow velocities in 0-g
flames, as compared to their 1-g counterparts,
pose a formidable challenge for the implementation of ex situ techniques, such as thermophoretic sampling. These low velocities extend
the dissipation period of flame disturbances
induced by the probe motion during insertion,
thus degrading position correspondence between probe and flame coordinates. Experience
from extensive sampling tests in buoyant flames
(see [13] and [17]) has established that when
thermophoretic sampling is employed unsuc-

B. KONSUR ET AL.
cessfully: (a) the collected soot aggregates may
contain widely disparate primary sizes dp, and
(b) the radial variation of dp at a fixed height
may be inconsistent and nonreproducible. Ku et
al. [18], who first examined the morphology of
soot collected thermophoretically in 0-g from
propane and ethylene flames, reported large
variations of dp even within individual aggregates. On the other hand, Urban et al. [7]
sampled a nonbuoyant ethylene flame and reported that insertion of the thermophoretic
sampler caused a significant cross-stream disturbance to the flame, thus rendering the radial
variations of soot morphology unreliable. Nonetheless, the latter investigators demonstrated
uniformity of soot primary sizes per aggregate
for soot collected beyond the flame tip [7]. The
above implications reaffirm the need for in situ
optical measurement methods that are capable
of providing soot morphological data in flames;
see [19] and references cited therein.
In the current study, the elevated fuel exit
velocities of Flame IV facilitated the reliable
deployment of thermophoretic sampling in 0-g.
In principle, high gas-flow velocities result in
rapid recovery of the disturbed flame after
probe insertion, thus improving spatial position
correspondence between probe and flame coordinates, a critical requirement in thermophoretic soot sampling. The burner exit velocity
in Flame IV of the current study is 145.5 cm/s
(mean value), which is nearly by a factor of 2
higher than the velocities employed in [7] as
well as in [18]. It is also noted that this exit
velocity is in the range encountered in buoyant
flames [20].
Figure 4 displays transmission electron photomicrographs of soot aggregates collected from
a height Z = 15 mm of Flame IV in 0-g. This
axial height corresponds to the overall peak
value of /„ measured in this flame (see Fig. 3A).
The micrographs of Fig. 4 depict soot morphology at three radial locations, namely, (A) r •*• 0.8
mm; (B) r <* 2.3 mm; and (C) r «• 2.8 mm. In
effect, these micrographs represent soot microstructure near the flame axis (A), on the soot
annulus (B), and outside the soot annulus (C).
Figure 4A (flame axis) reveals the presence of
small diffuse background particles, identified as
soot precursor particles in [21, 22]. These particles appear to coexist with larger aggregates

SOOT AEROSOL PROPERTIES IN NONBUOYANT FLAMES

517

Fig. 4. Transmission electron micrographs of soot aggregates collected from the axial height Z=15 mm of Flame IV in 0-g.
This height corresponds to the overall peak value of/ v measured in this flame. The three micrographs depict soot morphology
at radial locations (A) near the flame axis, (B) on the soot annulus, and (C) outside the soot annulus. The aggregate identified
by the arrow in (A) was probably collected when the thermophoretic probe pierced through the high-density soot annulus.

(see arrow) which were presumably collected
when the thermophoretic probe pierced
through the high-density soot annulus. The aggregates extracted from the annular region (Fig.
4B) display a rather uniform primary size, as do
the aggregates collected further away from the
soot annulus (Fig. 4C). While soot primary
particle size is uniform for each radial location
at this height, it varies noticeably with radius. It
is also noted that the observed uniformity of dp
at a fixed location within a 0-g flame, although
not surprising in view of our knowledge of 1-g
flames, is important because it simplifies the
data reduction procedures when optical measurements utilizing the fractal aggregate concept are employed [23-25]. The primary sizes
for the soot aggregates of Figs. 4B and 4C were
quantified via image analysis. A population of
—150 primary particles was examined at each
location using a Micro-Comp high-resolution
interactive morphometry station. The values dp
= 40.6 nm (standard deviation crg = 5.4 nm) and
29.9 nm (crg = 4.8 nm) were determined for the
flame locations corresponding to Figs. 4B and
4C, respectively. This considerable reduction in
dp (by more than 25%) occurs within a radial

distance of ~0.5 mm at that height. Unfortunately, aggregate statistics could not be obtained because of the apparent aggregate overlap in Fig. 4B.
Figure 5 displays two TEM micrographs of
soot aggregates collected from the soot annuli
of two separate flames (A in 1-g, B in 0-g). The
burner exit conditions for these two flames were
identical and corresponded to Case IV in Table
1. Each soot sample was collected at the height
where the overall maximum value of /„ was
measured in that particular flame. This height
was Z = 10 mm in 1-g [5], and Z = 15 mm in
0-g. In essence, the soot aggregates seen in Fig.
5 represent the maximum primary sizes in these
two flames. While no conclusive statement can
be made regarding the degree of aggregation of
the two samples (the aggregates in Fig. 5B
probably overlap), it is apparent that the soot
primary size in 0-g is considerably larger than
that under buoyant conditions. The values of dp
were measured at the flame locations corresponding to the aggregates of Figs. 5A (1-g) and
5B (0-g). They were, respectively, 28.6 nm (crg =
3.9 nm) and 40.6 nm (ag = 5.4 nm). The
increase of soot primary size in the absence of

B. KONSUR ET AL.

518

The simultaneous knowledge of the local
values of soot primary size and soot volume
fraction for the flame aerosol can produce [26]
estimates of the local values of the number
concentration of primary particles (Np) and
surface area (ST) of paniculate phase per unit
volume of the combustion gases according to
the expressions
6/,

6fv

These simple expressions are based on two
main assumptions. The first requires point contact between the monodisperse spherical primary particles forming the polydisperse aggregates. Since the soot aggregates consist of
primary particles bridged together (see Fig. 5),
the calculated value of ST forms an upper bound
of the actual soot surface area. The second
assumption requires that particle nucleation
is not active during the soot surface growth
period. The observed local uniformity of dp
supports the latter condition. Table 2 lists the
values of Np and ST determined for the two
radial locations corresponding to Figs. 4B and
4C; both at Z = 15 mm, where the overall
peak value of soot volume fraction was measured for Flame IV in 0-g. The primary particle number density Np is about the same at
both radial locations, thus suggesting nucleation rates of similar strength at the beginning
of the corresponding flow paths lower in the
flame. On the other hand, the soot surface
area is reduced away from the soot annulus at
that height. One set of 1-g values for Np and
ST is given in Table 2 for the soot annulus of

Fig. 5. Transmission electron micrographs of soot aggregates collected from the soot annuli of two separate flames
(A in 1-g, B in 0-g). The burner exit conditions for these two
flames were identical and corresponded to Case IV of Table
1. Each sample was collected at the height where the overall
maximum value of/* was measured in that particular flame.
This height was Z = 10 mm for (A), and Z = 15 mm for (B).

gravity is consistent with the observations of Ku
et al. [18] who sampled propane and ethylene
flames. Finally, it is worth noting that the maximum value of dp in 0-g for the diluted acetylene
fuel used in the current work is almost identical
to the soot primary size reported in [7] for
aggregates released by an ethylene flame burning in 0-g.

TABLE 2
Selected Data for the Soot Aerosol

Flame
IV in 0-g
IV in 0-g
IV in 1-g

Height
(mm)

15
15
10

" Soot annulus.
* Outside soot annulus.
c
Soot annulus.
d
From [5].

Radial
Location
(mm)

2.3°
2.8*

\jf

f.

d

P

Nf

ST

(ppm)

(nm)

(cm"3)

(cm'Aan3)

11.1

40.6
29.9
28.6

3.2 X 10"
4.1 X 10"
6.4 X 10"

16.4
11.4
16.6

S.T
7.9"

SOOT AEROSOL PROPERTIES IN NONBUOYANT FLAMES
Flame IV at the height Z = 10 mm, where the
overall maximum value of soot volume fraction was measured [5]. The number density of
the primary particles in 1-g is by a factor of 2
higher than that in 0-g, suggesting relatively
stronger nucleation rates in the presence of
buoyancy. On the other hand, under the conditions investigated in the current study,
buoyancy appears to exert little influence on
soot surface areas. Finally, it is worth mentioning that the measured values of Np and ST
for the 50% (vol.) C2H2-N2 fuel mixture in
this study are similar to those reported in [26]
for buoyant ethylene flames.

CONCLUSIONS
The spatial distributions and morphological
properties of the soot aerosol have been examined experimentally in a series of soot-emitting
0-g laminar gas-jet nonpremixed flames, which
have characteristic flow residence times varying
by up to a factor of 2. The work was performed
at the 2.2-s drop tower of the NASA Lewis
Research Center. The experimental methodology deployed jet diffusion flames of nitrogendiluted acetylene fuel burning in quiescent air at
atmospheric pressure. Full-field laser-light extinction was utilized to determine transient soot
spatial distributions in the cylindrical flames,
and thermophoretic sampling was employed in
conjunction with TEM to define soot microstructure and primary sizes at selected locations
within the flames. The 50% (volume) C2H2/N2
fuel mixture was injected through mm-sized
burners with Reynolds numbers of the order of
100. While the 0-g flames released soot from
their open tip, their buoyant counterparts operated below their smoke point.
The 0-g flames attained a quasi-steady state
roughly 0.7 s after ignition, and sustained their
annular structure even beyond their luminous
flame tip. The gas-jet momentum at the burner
exit proved to be an influential parameter affecting the spatial distribution of the soot field
in 0-g (contrary to buoyant-flame structure).
The measured peak soot volume fractions
showed a complex dependence on burner exit
conditions, and decreased in a nonlinear fashion
with decreasing flow residence times. Fuel pre-

519

heat by ~140 K appears to accelerate the
formation of soot near the flame axis via enhanced fuel pyrolysis rates. In turn, the increased soot presence triggers higher flame
radiative losses (i.e., reduced flame temperatures) which may account for the observed
premature suppression of soot growth along the
annular region.
Electron photomicrographs of soot samples
collected thermophoretically from a 0-g flame
which featured a burner exit velocity typical of
buoyant combustion conditions, revealed the
presence of soot precursor particles near the
symmetry axis at an axial location around midflame height. At that height, the experimental
observations also verified that soot primary sizes
are nearly uniform locally, but vary considerably
with radius. A reduction of primary size by more
than 25% was measured along a radial increment of —0.5 mm from the radial location of the
soot annulus. The peak value of soot primary
size in 0-g was found to be by 40% larger than in
1-g, under the same burner exit conditions.
Estimates of the number concentration of
primary particles and surface area of soot particulate phase per unit volume of the combustion gases were also made for selected in-flame
locations. The number density of primary particles in 1-g was by a factor of 2 higher than that
in 0-g, suggesting relatively stronger nucleation
rates in the presence of buoyancy. On the other
hand, under the conditions investigated in the
current study, buoyancy appeared to exert little
influence on soot surface areas.
This work has been supported by NASA under
Grant No. NGT3-52300. The authors wish to
thank Prof. Mun Choi and Kirk Jensen of UlCfor
the conveyance of the tomographic inversion programs.
REFERENCES
1. Law, C. K., and Faeth, G. M, Prog. Energy Comb. Sci.
20:65-113 (1994).
2. Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Stocker, D. P., and
Olson, S. L.,AIAA J. 28:236-244 (1990).
3. Mortazavi, S., Sunderland, P. B., Jurng, J., Koylii, U.
0., and Faeth, G. M., 31st Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno NV, Jan. 1993, Paper AIAA 93-078.
4. Megaridis, C. M., Konsur, B., and Griffin, D. W.,
Twenty-Sixth Symposium (International) on Combus-

c s

B. KONSUR ET AL.

520

5.
6.
7.

• 8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

lion. The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1996,
pp.1291-1299.
Konsur, B., Megaridis, C. M., and Griffin, D. W.,
Combust. Flame 116:334-347 (1999).
Greenberg, P. S., and Ku, J. C., Combust. Flame
108:227-230 (1997).
Urban, D. L., Yuan, Z.-G., Sunderland, P. B., Linteris,
G. T., Voss, J. E., Lin, K. C, Dai, Z., Sun, K., and
Faeth, G. M., 36th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno
NV, Jan. 1998, Paper AIAA 98-0568.
Lekan, J., Gotti, D. J., Jenkins, A. J., Owens, J. C, and
Johnston, M. R. (1996). Users Guide for the 2.2 Second
Drop Tower of the NASA Lewis Research Center. NASA
TM-107090.
Greenberg, P. S., and Ku, J. C, Appl. Optics 36:55145522 (1997).
Dasch, C. J., Appl. Optics 31:1146-1152 (1992).
Smyth, K. C, and Shaddix, C. R., Combust. Flame
107:314-320 (1996).
Koylu, U. 6., Faeth, G. M., Farias, T. L., and Carvalho, M. G., Combust. Flame 100:621-633 (1995).
Dobbins, R. A., and Megaridis, C. M., Langmuir
3:254-259 (1987).
Rosner, D. E., Mackowski, D. W., and Garcia-Ybarra,
P., Combust. Sci. Technol. 80:87-101 (1991).
Honnery, D. R., and Kent, J. H., Combust. Flame
82:426-434 (1990).

16. Mauss, F., Schafer, T., and Bockhorn, H., Combust.
Flame 99:697-705 (1994).
17. Megaridis, C. M., and Dobbins, R. A., Combust. Sci.
Technol. 71:95-109 (1990).
18. Ku, J. C, Griffin, D. W., Greenberg, P. S., and Roma,
J., Combust. Flame 102:216-218 (1995).
19. Koylu, U. O., Combust. Flame 109:488-500 (1997).
20. Santoro, R. J., Yeh, T. T., Horvath, J. J., and Semerjian, H. G., Combust. Flame 53:89-115 (1987).
21. Dobbins, R. A., and Subramaniasivam, H., in Soot
Formation in Combustion (H. Bockhorn, Ed.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994, pp. 290-301.
22. Dobbins, R. A., Govatzidakis, G. J., Lu, W., Schwartzman, A. F., and Fletcher, R. A., Combust. Sci. TechnoL
121:103-121 (1996).
23. Julien, R., and Botet, R., Aggregation and Fractal
Aggregates. World Scientific, Singapore, 1987.
24. Dobbins, R. A., and Megaridis, C. M., Appl. Optics
30:4747-4754 (1991).
25. Koylii, U. O., and Faeth, G. M., J. Heat Transfer
116:152-159 (1994).
26. Megaridis, C. M., and Dobbins, R. A., Combust. Sci.
TechnoL 66:1-16 (1989).
Received 2 July 1998; revised 5 February 1999; accepted
11 February 1999

