report is a preprint of an article submitted to a journal for
publication Because of changes that may be made before formal
publication, this preprint is made available *jth the understanding
that it will not be cited or reproduced without the permission ot the

I 4 6 ft '11)£^> 50
'

This

7 X

author.

Shapes of Nonbuoyant Round Luminous Hydrocarbon/Air
Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames
K.-C. LIN, G. M. FAETH*
The University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109

P. B. SUNDERLAND, D. L. URBAN, and Z.-G. YUAN
NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135
The shapes (luminous flame boundaries) of round luminous nonbuoyant soot-containing hydrocarbon/air
laminar jet diffusion flames at microgravity were found from color video images obtained on orbit in the Space
Shuttle Columbia. Test conditions included ethylene- and propane-fueled flames burning in still air at an
ambient temperature of 300 K, ambient pressures of 35-130 kPa, initial jet diameters of 1.6 and 2.7 mm, and
jet exit Reynolds numbers of 45-170. Present test times were 100-200 s and yielded steady axisymmetric flames
that were close to the laminar smoke point (including flames both emitting and not emitting soot) with luminous
flame lengths of 15-63 mm. The present soot-containing flames had larger luminous flame lengths than earlier
ground-based observations having similar burner configurations: 40% larger than the luminous flame lengths of
soot-containing low gravity flames observed using an aircraft (K.C-135) facility due to reduced effects of
accelerative disturbances and unsteadiness; roughly twice as large as the luminous flame lengths of sootcontaining normal gravity flames due to the absence of effects of buoyant mixing and roughly twice as large as
the luminous flame lengths of soot-free low gravity flames observed using drop tower facilities due to the
presence of soot luminosity and possible reduced effects of unsteadiness. Simplified expressions to estimate the
luminous flame boundaries of round nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames were obtained from the classical
analysis of Spalding (1979); this approach provided successful correlations of flame shapes for both soot-free
and soot-containing flames, except when the soot-containing flames were in the opened-tip configuration that
is reached at fuel flow rates near and greater than the laminar smoke point fuel flow rate. © 1998 by The
Combustion Institute

NOMENCLATURE

Cf
d
D
L0
Lf

empirical flame length parameter
jet exit diameter

mass diffusivity
distance from jet exit to virtual
origin
distance from jet exit to luminous
flame tip

in
p
Re
r
Sc
fch

w
W

MAX
W//2
Zsl
2

burner mass flow rate
pressure
jet Reynolds number, 4 rh/(irdii)
radial distance
Schmidt number, vID
characteristic residence time, 2L ( /u 0
mean burner exit velocity, 4
luminous flame diameter
maximum luminous flame diameter
luminous flame diameter at £ = 1/2.
stoichiometric mixture fraction
streamwise distance

'Corresponding author. E-mail: gmfaethfg'Umich.edu
COMBUSTION AND FLAME 116:415-431 (1999)
© 1998 by The Combustion Institute
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.

£

normalized streamwise distance, Eq.
6

/A

dynamic viscosity

v

kinematic viscosity

p

density

Subscripts
o

burner exit condition

INTRODUCTION

Observations of nonbuoyant laminar diffusion
flames are described which were obtained at
microgravity on board the orbiting Space Shuttle Columbia. Laminar diffusion flames are of
interest because they provide model flame systems that are far more tractable for theoretical
and experimental studies than more practical
turbulent diffusion flames. Laminar diffusion
flames also merit study because understanding
their transport and chemical reaction processes
is a necessary precursor to understanding these
processes in turbulent diffusion flames. In addi0010-2]80/99/$19.00
Pll S0010-2180(98)00100-X

416

tion, many aspects of laminar diffusion flames
have direct relevance to turbulent diffusion
flames by application of the laminar flamelet
concept of turbulent diffusion flames [1]. The
present study specifically considered the shapes
(the luminous flame boundaries) of laminar
diffusion flames, which is a flame property that
has attracted numerous investigations since the
classical study of Burke and Schumann [2]. This
interest follows because simple nonintrusive
measurements yield flame shapes, which can be
used to evaluate theories of laminar flame processes and predictions of laminar flame structure. A concern about measurements of the
shapes of laminar diffusion flames at normal
gravity, however, involves the intrusion of disturbances due to buoyancy because they are not
relevant to practical diffusion flames, which
generally are not buoyant due to their large
velocities. These buoyant disturbances also tend
to obscure important properties of the nonbuoyant flames that are of the greatest interest
[3]. Thus, the present investigation sought measurements of the shapes of classical steady
nonbuoyant round laminar jet diffusion flames
by exploiting the long-term microgravity environment of an orbiting space shuttle. The objectives of this paper are to document these
measurements and to develop a summary of the
results, convenient for use by others, based on
simplified analysis of nonbuoyant laminar jet
diffusion flames.
Past measurements of the shapes of nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames have been carried out using either drop towers to provide
microgravity environments [4-13] or aircraft
facilities [14] to provide low-gravity environments. The earliest work along these lines was a
series of studies of hydrocarbon-fueled laminar
jet diffusion flames using a 2.2 s free-fall (drop)
tower due to Cochran and co-workers [4-6].
They ignited the flames before putting the experiment package into free-fall and observed an
immediate reduction of the luminous flame
length when the flame was exposed to the low
gravity environment. The subsequent transient
development of the flame shape, combined with
the relatively short duration of the microgravity
environment, raised concerns about the results
due to potential effects of unsteady flame development. Another problem with measure-

K.-C. LIN ET AL.
ments of the shapes of hydrocarbon-fueled
flames is that the luminosity of these flames is
mainly caused by glowing soot particles, particularly along the flame axis where luminous
flame lengths are normally measured. Thus, the
relationship between luminous flame dimensions and the location of the flame sheet (where
the local mixture fraction is stoichiometric) is an
issue because the latter generally is associated
with predictions of laminar flame shapes. Past
measurements of the flame structure and soot
properties of weakly buoyant and buoyant
round laminar jet diffusion flames burning in
still or slowly moving air provide some information about luminous and stoichiometric flame
lengths [15-18]. These observations indicate
that ratios of luminous- to stoichiometric-flame
lengths are in the range 0.9-1.8, with these
ratios increasing as the laminar smoke point
flame length is approached [15-18]. This behavior comes about because soot oxidation begins
at slightly fuel-rich conditions and can continue
in the fuel-lean region for a time before either
the soot is consumed (non-soot-emitting
flames), or the soot oxidation reactions are
quenched (soot-emitting flames), with luminous
flame lengths varying accordingly [15].
Studies following the work of Cochran and
coworkers [4-6] due to Bahadori and coworkers [7-12] sought to resolve potential effects of
transient flame development and soot luminosity on measurements of the shape of nonbuoyant round laminar jet diffusion flames using
both 2.2 s and 5.2 s drop towers. In order to
minimize problems of transient behavior, they
ignited the flames shortly after the experimental
package was released and observed nearly
steady flame shapes near the end of free fall.
Nevertheless, temperature fields and radiation
emissions of the flames were still changing at
the end of the 5.2s free-fall periods for the flame
conditions that they considered, implying that
transient effects had still not fully relaxed during the available microgravity test time.
Sunderland et al. [14] considered the luminous flame lengths of nonbuoyant soot-containing round laminar jet diffusion flames as part of
a study of the laminar smoke point properties of
nonbuoyant laminar diffusion flames. These experiments were carried out in a KC-135 aircraft
facility that provided roughly 20 s at low gravity

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
by flying parabolic trajectories. It was hoped
that these long low-gravity test times would
minimize effects of transient flame development
on observed flame shapes. These flames all
approached laminar smoke point conditions
and should be representative of long luminous
flame lengths discussed earlier. Unfortunately,
the KC-135 aircraft facility provided a rather
disturbed low-gravity environment (with significant g-jitter) with the accompanying unsteady
effects influencing both flame shapes and laminar smoke point properties [14].
In spite of potential effects of unsteadiness
for the ground-based studies of nonbuoyant
laminanyet diffusion flames, however, Cochran
and co-workers [4-6], Bahadori and co-workers
[7-12], and Sunderland et al. [14] all observed a
linear correlation between luminous flame
lengths and fuel flow rates, independent of jet
exit diameter, for each fuel burning in air. This
behavior also is typical of the luminous flame
lengths of buoyant round laminar jet diffusion
flames [19]. Thus, to the extent that this linear
relationship is retained for truly steady and
nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames, it offers an important characteristic useful for testing flame shape predictions.
Most recently, Sunderland et al. [13] sought
to avoid problems of both unsteadiness and soot
luminosity by measuring the shape of soot-free
laminar jet diffusion flames using a 2.2 s drop
tower facility. Ambient pressures, jet exit diameters and fuel flow rates were controlled to
provide soot-free (blue) laminar jet diffusion
flames having relatively small characteristic
flame residence times so that unsteady effects
were potentially minimized. These results for
soot-free flames exhibit generally shorter flame
lengths than corresponding soot-containing
flames but the limited flame development period
at microgravity still introduces uncertainties in the
flame shape measurements due to potential effects of transient flame development.
The shapes of laminar jet diffusion flames
also have attracted significant theoretical attention. Measured flame lengths for both soot-free
and soot-containing flames have been used to
develop empirical models and to evaluate theoretical predictions for a range of buoyant
conditions. The most well-known empirical
model for laminar diffusion flames is the linear

417

correlation between the luminous flame length
and the corresponding fuel flow rate [19] that
was mentioned earlier. Several laminar diffusion flame models of varying complexity also
have been proposed [20-26] that successfully
predict the linear correlation between stoichiometric flame lengths and the fuel flow rates (or
equivalently between the stoichiometric flame
length normalized by the jet exit diameter and
the jet exit Reynolds number). Among these,
the analysis of Spalding [22] (which is described
in some detail by Kuo [23]) offers a potentially
simple and robust method for estimating the
shapes of steady nonbuoyant round laminar jet
diffusion flames. Nevertheless, modifications of
this approach to deal with soot-containing
flames (as opposed to soot-free flames), the
capabilities of this approach to estimate (or
correlate) all flame shape properties (as opposed to simply luminous flame lengths), and
the performance of this approach for truly
steady and nonbuoyant round laminar jet diffusion flames, are all issues that need to be
addressed.
Based on the previous discussion of the literature, several aspects of the shape of nonbuoyant round laminar jet diffusion flames need to
be resolved, as follows: to what extent have past
observations using ground-based microgravity
facilities been affected by transient development or disturbances of the flames, to what
extent have differences between stoichiometric
conditions and the limits of visible luminosity
from soot affected estimates of flame shapes,
and to what extent can flame shape data be
predicted (correlated) by simplified analysis?
These issues were addressed during the present
investigation based on observations of nonbuoyant round laminar jet diffusion flames at longduration microgravity conditions on board the
orbiting Space Shuttle Columbia, and by evaluation of simplified analysis of flame structure
using these observations, with the following
specific objectives:
1. Measure the shapes (luminous flame boundaries), and associated properties such as luminous flame lengths and diameters, for
various fuel types, jet exit diameters, jet exit
flow rates (Reynolds numbers), and ambient
pressures.

418

2. Compare the present measurements with
earlier ground-based observations having
similar burner conditions in order to help
quantify effects of transient flame development, flow disturbances (g-jitter), soot luminosity, and buoyancy on flame shape properties.
3. Exploit the measurements in order to evaluate the simple flame shape analysis of Spalding [22] and develop this approach to provide convenient correlations of flame shape
measurements for use by others.
Present observations were limited to soot-containing ethylene- and propane-fueled flames
burning in still dry air, at conditions near the
laminar smoke point.
The following description of the study begins
with consideration of experimental methods,
test conditions, and theoretical methods. Results are then discussed, considering luminous
flame lengths, luminous flame diameters, and
luminous flame shapes, in turn. Major conclusions are summarized at the end of the article.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Experimental methods will be only briefly described; see Urban et al. [27] for more details.
The laminar jet diffusion flames were stabilized
at the exit of round fuel nozzles located along
the axis of a windowed cylindrical chamber. The
chamber had a diameter of 400 mm, a maximum
length of 740 mm, an internal volume of 0.082
m3, and was operated at pressures of 35-130
kPa. The chamber was filled with oxygen/nitrogen mixtures to provide the nominal composition of dry air (21 ± 1% oxygen by volume). The
pressure, temperature, and composition of the
gas surrounding the test flames all varied
slightly over the flame burning periods due to
the limited amount of air within the closed
chamber. The greatest change involved the
composition of gas within the chamber but even
this was controlled so that the maximum oxygen
consumption never exceeded 2% by volume
during any flame test. These conditions were
maintained by venting the chamber to space and
adding fresh dry air (as needed) prior to each
test.
Two fuel nozzles, consisting of constant diam-

K.-C. LIN ET AL.
eter cylindrical stainless steel tubes having inside diameters of 1.6 and 2.7 mm, wall thicknesses of 0.28 mm, and lengths of 148 mm from
the inlet plenum, were used. The inlets of these
nozzles had flow straighteners while the overall
length-to-diameter ratios of the passages were
greater than 55:1, which was sufficient to yield
fully developed laminar pipe flow at the nozzle
exit for the present test conditions (112 ^ Re0
s 46). The test fuels were stored in cylinders
and were delivered to the nozzles through solenoid valves and a mass flow rate controller and
sensor. The flames were ignited by a hot wire
coil that was retracted from the nozzle exit once
ignition was successful.
Several measurements were made to monitor
flame operation as follows: fuel flow rate with
an accuracy of 0.8%, fuel temperature at the
nozzle inlet with an accuracy of ±1.5 K, chamber pressure with an accuracy of 1.2%, and
chamber gas temperature (far from flames) with
an accuracy of ± 1 K. These measurements were
recorded at a rate of approximately 1 Hz.
Flame shapes (luminous flame boundaries)
were measured from images obtained using a
standard color CCD video camera (Hitachi,
Model KP-C553). The camera had a 125 X 164
mm field of view and a depth of field of 25 mm
centered on the flame axis. The spatial resolution of the recorded images was better than 0.3
mm. It was not possible to adjust image brightness on orbit; therefore, it was necessary to
select camera settings so that the flames having
the smallest levels of luminosity (found from
ground-based tests at microgravity using a freefall facility) could still be observed. This implied
that the flame images were generally overexposed although they still provided sharp images
of luminous flame boundaries. Flame images
were recorded at a rate of 30 images/s. The
flames were unusually symmetric; nevertheless,
the shapes reported here represent average
positions for the two sides.
TEST CONDITIONS
The test conditions of the present flames are
summarized in Table 1. A total of 21 flames
were observed, yielding the following ranges of
test properties: ethylene- and propane-fueled

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES

419

TABLE 1

Summary of Test Conditions
Test"

P
(kPa)

u

(mg/s)

01E*
03E'
DIE
02E
03E
04E
ME
15E
16E
17E

flames, d = \ .6 mm, Zs, = 0.0636:
1.84
100
1.84
50
0.71
100
0.76
50
1.29
50
0.91
65
0.67
80
0.61
100
0.74
65
1.34
35

05E
06E
07E
08E

Ames, d = 2.7 mm, ZSI
65
80
100
50

= 0.0636:
1.14
1.16
1.08
1.38

a

'ch

(mm/s)

(ms)

(mm)

(mm)

49.3
63.0
20.6
17.7
36.5
26.5
18.0
14.7
19.0
34.0

13.7
14.2
12.6
13.1
13.8
13.1
12.9
11.5
13.4
14.7

820
1630
320
670
1140
620
370
270
510
1690

138
138
54
57
97
68
50
46
56
100

121
77
130
53
64
86
97
109
75
40

270
230
170
430

51
51
48
62

215
269
302
173

29.1
30.3
25.5
37.3

21.4
20.9
19.6
21.4

170
1020

73
172
116
83
99
78
67

277
120
144
218
177
164
191

23.3
61.4
38.1
27.1
32.4
23.9
19.0

17.4
18.8
17.4
16.6
17.2
16.9
16.1

C3Hg/air flames, d = 1.6 mm, 2S1 = 0.0602:

09P
10P
IIP
12P
13P
18P
19P

130
50
65
100
80
80
100

0.78
1.82
1.22
0.88
1.04
0.82
0.71

530
250
370
290
200

° 01E* and 03E* were carried out on flight STS-83, all other tests were carried out on flight STS-94. Only tests 01E*, 03E*,
and 01E involved soot-emitting flames in the period when flame shape observations were made.
* Mean velocity based on fuel density at jet exit (nominal pressure and 300 K).
c
Mean Reynolds number based on fuel viscosities at jet exit (300 K), i.e., 10.6 mg/(sm) for ethylene and 8.4 mg/(sm) for
propane.

flames in burning dry air, ambient temperatures
and pressures of 300 K and 35-130 kPa, jet exit
diameters of 1.6 and 2.7 mm, jet exit velocities
of 170-1630 mm/s, jet exit Reynolds numbers of
46-172, characteristic residence times (defined
as 2L1/u0) of 40-302 ms, and luminous flame
lengths of 15-63 mm.
For convenience, the test numbers have the
suffixes E and P to denote ethylene- and propane-fueled flames, respectively. Asterisks are
used to denote the two tests completed during
flight STS-83. It should be noted that the characteristic residence times of the present flames
are large (40-302 ms) compared to most practical applications where characteristic residence
times are typically less than 10 ms. As mentioned earlier, present flames were generally
relatively close to laminar smoke point conditions with test flames 01E*, 03E*, and OlE

actually emitting soot in the period when flame
shape observations were made. The remaining
flames all contained soot but were not emitting
soot.
THEORETICAL METHODS

The goal of the analysis was to develop a
convenient method to help interpret and correlate the present flame shape measurements. A
set of easily used equations was sought, along
with recommendations for selecting the thermochemical and transport properties appearing in
these equations, as opposed to more complete
methods that would require numerical solutions
on a computer. Thus, the basis for this approach
was the simplified analysis of nonbuoyant round
laminar jet diffusion flames due to Spalding

420

[22]. The following description of the analysis is
brief and concentrates on the present application of the approach; see Spalding [22] and Kuo
[23] for more details.
The major assumptions of the flame shape
analysis of Spalding [22] are as follows: (1)
attention is limited to steady, axisymmetric laminar jet diffusion flames burning at constant
pressure in still environments; (2) effects of
buoyancy and associated changes of potential
energy are negligible; (3) the Mach number of
the flow is small so that effects of viscous
dissipation and changes of kinetic energy can be
ignored; (4) the flame has a large aspect ratio so
that diffusion of mass (species), momentum,
and energy in the streamwise direction is small;
(5) for the same reasons, the solution of the
governing equations can be approximated by
far-field conditions where the details of initial
conditions at the jet exit can be replaced by jet
invariants for the conservation of mass (elements), momentum, and energy in the integral
sense; (6) all chemical reactions occur in a thin
flame sheet with fast chemistry so that fuel and
oxidant are never simultaneously present at
finite concentrations; (7) the diffusivities of
mass (of all species), momentum and energy are
all equal; (8) all thermophysical and transport
properties are constant throughout the flame;
and (9) effects of radiation are small. The first
three assumptions are justified as conditions of
the present experiments. The fourth and fifth
assumptions are justified for at least the portion
of the present measurements that have large
aspect ratios (e.g., present measurements summarized in Table 1 involve flame aspect ratios,
2LfAvMAX, in the range 2-9, and burner aspect
ratios, Lfld, roughly four times larger). The
sixth assumption prescribing a thin diffusion
flame sheet has a long history of effective
application to find the shape of laminar diffusion flames, extending back to the classical work
of Burke and Schumann [2]. The remaining
assumptions, however, are not satisfied by laminar jet diffusion flames and were only adopted
here so that a simple formula for flame shapes
could be found, and due to past success of
similar approximations for analysis of the
shapes of laminar diffusion flames [20-24].
Solution of the governing equations using the
present assumptions, after associating the loca-

K.-C. LIN ET AL.
tion of the luminous flame boundary with the
location of the thin flame sheet where the
stoichiometric mixture fraction is reached,
yields the following expression for the luminous
flame length [22, 23]:

L f /d =

(1)
The value of Zst in Eq. 1 can be found simply as
the mass fraction of burner exit fluid (fuel in the
present case) in a stoichiometric mixture of
burner-exit fluid and ambient fluid (air in the
present case); these values are summarized in
Table 1 for the present test conditions. The
variation of Zst is not large for combustion of
hydrocarbon/air mixtures; thus, while the variation of Zst is small for present experiments, the
values considered are relevant to many practical
applications. The corresponding expression for
the flame shape, yielding the flame diameter as
a function of streamwise distance, is as follows:
U/2
wZJd = 3 1/2 (z/L f )[(L f /z) 1/2 - 1]

(2)

Differentiating Eq. 2, and setting the result
equal to zero, provides expressions for the maximum flame diameter and the streamwise distance where this maximum diameter is reached,
as follows:

Jd = 9/16 at z/L t =9/l6.

(3)

Correlation of the measurements was sought
by selecting conditions to find mean transport
properties and introducing some empirical parameters to match measurements and predictions. First of all, the equal diffusivity approximation was relaxed by introducing the Schmidt
number into Eq. 1 because the flame sheet is
mainly affected by mass transport properties
represented by the Schmidt number. Transport
properties affect Eqs. 1-3 through the Schmidt
number and the viscosity used to compute the
Reynolds number. It was found that a reasonable correlation of luminous flame lengths
could be obtained by approximating these properties by the properties of air at the average of
the adiabatic flame temperature and the ambient temperature. This selection seems reasonable because air-like gases dominate the composition of the present flames. The properties
needed to find the Schmidt number and the
mean gas viscosity were taken from Braun et al.

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
[28]. The range of the flame shape correlations
was extended to flames having small aspect
ratios by introducing a virtual origin at a distance L0 from the jet exit, which is a conventional step for properties like luminous flame
lengths. The flame length expression was then
fine-tuned by introducing an empirical coefficient, Cf, as discussed later. With these changes,
Eq. 1 for the luminous flame length becomes:
(Lt - L0)/d = (3Cf/32)ReSc/Zst,

(4)

while Eq. 2 for the luminous flame diameter
becomes
\l/2

(5)

where
£=(z-L0)/(Lf-L0).

(6)

Thus, the flame radius properties are only indirectly affected by assumed transport properties,
through the computation of the flame length of
Eq. 4.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Flame Appearance
Ignition conditions were established during
ground-based tests at microgravity using a freefall facility and involved fuel flow rates greater
than the values used during the present flame
tests. Thus, after ignition was confirmed, fuel
flow rates were reduced to conditions near but
generally smaller than the laminar smoke point
fuel flow rates. Exceptions to this practice where
tests 01E*, 03E*, and 01E, that were soot
emitting.
After the fuel flow rate was set, an additional
5-10 s was required for disturbances to decay
away. The flames were then observed during an
80-180 s quasi-steady burning period where
flame shapes and colors changed slowly due to
the modest variations of oxygen concentrations,
pressures and temperatures of the gas within
the test chamber, see Urban et al. [27] for
typical records of chamber gas properties as a
function of time during the experiments. Video
records used for the present flame shape measurements were obtained near the start of the
quasi-burning period; therefore, the test condi-

421

tions correspond to the nominal conditions
summarized in Table 1 within experimental
uncertainties.
Typical of many past observations of sootcontaining nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion
flames [8-14], present flame shapes could be
grouped into closed-tip and opened-tip configurations, which were observed for fuel flow
rates smaller and larger than the laminar smoke
point fuel flow rates, respectively. In fact, the
tip-opening phenomenon provided a convenient
indicator of laminar smoke points for present
test conditions because the associated dramatic
change of the shape of the flame tip invariably
corresponded to the first observations of soot
emissions.
Some typical video records of the present
closed-tip laminar nonbuoyant jet diffusion
flames are illustrated in Fig. 1. The test numbers, corresponding to the test numbers of
Table 1, are marked below each image. The
flames illustrated include both ethylene- and
propane-fueled flames for jet exit diameters of
1.6 mm. The jet exits, which are visible only in
the images of tests 02E, 03E, 16E, and 17E, are
on the same side of each image as the test
number. As noted earlier, fixed camera settings
imply that images of some strongly-luminous
flames are overexposed. Thus, while the images
provide a general indication of regions of the
flames that have different colors, they do not
provide an accurate representation of actual
flame colors. In spite of this limitation, however,
luminous flame shapes and corresponding flame
shape parameters (e.g., luminous flame lengths
and diameters) can still be identified from the
video images. In addition to the brightly luminous region caused by the presence of glowing
soot velocities, blue luminosity can be seen near
the jet exit and just beyond the edge of the
brightly luminous region, particularly near the
base of the flame. The blue region was never
resolved clearly, however, and was not visible at
all near the flame tip due to the presence of the
brightly luminous region. Finally, as the laminar
smoke point fuel flow rate was approached, the
flames tended to become blunt as a precursor to
the tip-opening phenomena; thus, the images of
tests 02E, 16E, and 18P are typical of blunt
closed-tip flames.
The present measurements of flame shapes

422

were based on the boundary of the brightly
luminous region caused by visible radiation
from soot because this was the most obvious
indication of luminous flame shape. The stoichiometric flame sheet (the flame sheet based on
the location of the stoichiometric mixture fraction) also is of great interest but this condition
could not be resolved, as already discussed.
Thus, the relationship between the luminous
flame boundaries and the position of the stoichiometric flame sheet is important for interpreting the present measurements. Soot concentration and temperature records suggest that
the present luminous flame boundaries lie just
inside the stoichiometric flame sheet along the
sides of the flame, not too near the flame tip;
see Urban et al. [27] for some typical examples.
The same evidence suggests that the present
luminous flame boundaries extend beyond the
stoichiometric flame sheet in the streamwise
direction near the flame tip, due to soot burnout
in the lean portions of the flames because
present test conditions were close to laminar
smoke points. Unfortunately, the extent of the
streamwise overlap cannot be quantified directly because local mixture fractions are not
known for the present flames. As discussed
earlier, past measurements in laminar jet diffusion flames suggest that the luminous flame
length might be as much as twice the flame
length based on the location of the stoichiometric conditions along the axis for conditions near
the laminar smoke point [15-18]. Thus, in order
to help quantify differences between luminous
and stoichiometric flame lengths, the flame
lengths of both soot-containing and soot-free
nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames for
similar burner and buoyancy conditions will be
compared in the following.
Some typical video records of opened-tip
nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames are
illustrated in Fig. 2. The identification of test
conditions and the location of the burner exit
are the same as Fig. 1. The flames illustrated
include ethylene-fueled flames for a jet exit
diameter of 2.7 mm and propane-fueled flames
for a jet exit diameter of 1.6 mm. The dramatic
difference between the shape of the tips of
closed- and opened-tipped flames is clearly evident by comparing the flame images of Figs. 1
and 2. Measurements of the structure of

K.-C. LIN ET AL.
opened-tipped flames show that soot is mainly
confined to an annular region, and that little
soot is present along the flame axis [27]. Thus,
soot luminosity from the annular-soot containing region, combined with small levels of soot
luminosity along the axis, is responsible for the
blunt or even cusp-like luminous shape of the
tip of these flames when viewed from the side as
projections. The flames illustrated in Fig. 2 have
fuel flow rates slightly smaller than the laminar
smoke point fuel flow rates. Video images of
opened-tip flames that are emitting soot, tests
01E* and 03E*, appear in Urban et al. [27];
however, they are qualitatively similar to the
opened-tip flames illustrated in Fig. 2.
Flame Lengths
The luminous flame length of laminar jet diffusion flames is a widely reported property that is
used to both characterize flame shapes and to
summarize soot emission properties (as laminar
smoke point flame lengths). The luminous
flame lengths reported here are the streamwise
distances between the burner exit and the farthest downstream plane normal to the flame
axis that contacts a luminous region of the flame
[either along the axis for closed-tip (non-sootemitting or nonsooting) flames or at the annular
soot layer for opened-tip (nonsooting and sootemitting or sooting) flames]. It is well known
that L{/d can be correlated as a linear function
of the jet exit Reynolds numbers, Re, for buoyant laminar jet diffusion flames for a given fuel
and ambient environment, however, each fuel
has its own individual correlation curve [19-24].
Thus, the performance of similar correlations
will be considered for the present nonbuoyant
laminar jet diffusion flames, based on the simple
classical theory of Spalding [22] as discussed
earlier, seeking a general correlation capable of
treating various fuels, burner diameters, and
ambient environments (pressures, temperatures, oxygen concentrations, etc.).
Measured and predicted luminous flame
lengths of the present nonbuoyant laminar jet
diffusion flames are illustrated in Fig. 3. These
results are presented as suggested by the modified Spalding [22] analysis, Eq. 4, with (L( L a )/d plotted as a function of ReSclZM. Measured luminous flame lengths are shown for all

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES

423

Fig. 1. Video images of typical closed-tip luminous hydrocarbon/air laminar jet diffusion flames (Tests 02E, 03E, 16E, 17E,
and 18P).

Fig. 2. Video images of typical opcncd-tip luminous hydrocarbon/air laminar jet diffusion flames (Tests 05E. 06E, ORE IIP.
and 12P).

424

K.-C. LIN ET AL.

so
.

FUEL SYMBOL SOOTING
C2H4
• ,n
(TYP.)\,

40
Sc = 0.76
L,,/d = -3.2
•O 30
CORRELATION

3

NONSOOTING
J20

f'V

'
THEORY

10

100

200

300

400

500

Re Sc / Zst

Fig. 3. Measured and predicted luminous flame lengths o(
nonbuoyant hydrocarbon/air laminar jet diffusion flames as
a function of ReSclZ^, measurements from present spacebased experiments.

the test conditions summarized in Table 1, with
non-sooting and sooting flames denoted by
closed and open symbols, respectively. The values of Zst used for the ethylene-fueled and
propane-fueled flames are summarized in Table
1; other properties were taken from Braun et al.
[28]. Values of Sc were based on the properties
of air at the mean temperature of the flames;
these values do not vary significantly over the
present test range so that a mean value of Sc =
0.76 was adopted for all the predictions. The
value of /n used to find the Re in Eq. 4 was also
based on the properties of air at the mean flame
temperature. A virtual origin at LJd = —3.2

was selected so that the fit of present data
passed through the origin of the plot. This type
of initial flame displacement seems quite reasonable because the flames generally attached
somewhat below the jet exit; see Figs. 1 and 2.
Furthermore, this empirical displacement of the
origin should hold for other flames at similar
conditions. In addition, this displacement of the
virtual origin, LJd = -3.2, is relatively small
compared to the present normalized flame
lengths (L/d in the range 9-39), which is typical
of conventional use of virtual origins to extend
large aspect ratio correlations to modest aspect
ratio conditions. Finally, plots of Eq. 4 for the Cf
= 1.00 (denoted theory) and a best-fit correlation for the present data for Cf = 1.13 (denoted
correlation) are also shown on the figures for
. comparison with present measurements. For
convenience, values of the virtual origin and Cf
for all the flame length correlations considered
here are summarized in Table 2.
The unprecedented steadiness of the present
nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames at microgravity minimized measurement uncertainties and yielded the remarkably unscattered
correlation of luminous flame lengths illustrated
in Fig. 3. The results for closed-tip and openedtip flames are illustrated but there is little to
choose between the two because tip opening
does not modify luminous flame lengths significantly. This is somewhat surprising because the
end of luminosity in soot-emitting flames is
caused by soot particles cooling below a level
where they can be observed rather than by soot
burnout which is the case for the other flames.
Nevertheless, these different mechanisms for

TABLE 2
Summary of Flame Length Correlations
Flame system
Space-based, soot-containing
and nonbuoyant
KC-135, soot-containing and
nonbuoyant
1-g, soot-containing and
buoyant
Drop tower, soot-free and
nonbuoyant

Source
Present study
Sunderland et al. [14]"
Urban et al. [26]
Sunderland et al. [13]

LJd

Cf

-3.2

1.13

0.4
-1.0

2.7

0.80
0.57
0.56

" Previously unpublished measurements obtained during the course of the cited study.
''The slope of the flame length correlations in Figs. 3 and 4 can be found by multiplying the C, by 3/32, following Eq. 4.

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
1UU

CORRELATION OF
•BLUE FLAME DATA^y
80 . CORRELATION
OF KC-135 DATA A
CORRELATION /
60 - OF SPACE
'
•o
\DATA
/ f

X*

.

•
'^^CORRELATION
OF 1-g DATA

J

Jr

/

•

40

'
.

20

BLUE FLAME DATA
FUEL
SYMBOL CH4
•
C2H6
C3H8
A

/'"

M*

0 f

i
C1*

i

400

i

i

1

1

800
1200
ReSc/Z s t

i

i

1600

i

20

Fig. 4. Luminous flame lengths of hydrocarbon/air laminar
jet diffusion flames as a function of fle5c/Zsl; correlation of
measurements of soot-free (blue) flames from Sunderland
et al. [13], correlation of measurements of KC-135 flames
obtained during the study reported by Sunderland et al. [14],
measurements (symbols) and correlation of 1-g flames
reported by Urban et al. [26] and correlation of measurements of the present space-based flames. Note that the
various correlations are terminated at the upper end of their
corresponding data range.

ending flame luminosity do not have a large
effect, with the luminous flame length correlations of the nonsooting and sooting flames being
essentially the same; therefore, both sets of data
are included in the present correlation according to Eq. 4.
The present selections of mean transport
properties in Eq. 4 yield results that are in
surprisingly good agreement with the measurements. In particular, the best fit value of Cf is
only 13% larger than unity. This behavior is
somewhat fortuitous, however, because the luminous flame length corresponds to the end of
the soot-containing region at near laminar
smoke point conditions, which generally is
downstream from the position of the stoichiometric flame sheet, as discussed earlier.
Several additional experimental determinations of luminous flame lengths are plotted
along with the present measurements in Fig. 4
in order to gain insight about effects of unsteadiness, buoyancy, and soot luminosity on
luminous flame lengths. In order.to provide a
unified basis for comparison, all these results

425

are based on experiments with laminar jet diffusion flames in still air having burner exit and
test chamber configurations similar to the
present space-based experiments and are plotted according to the Spalding [22] analysis. The
resulting best fit values of LJd and Cf for each
of these sets of data are summarized in Table 2.
All the measurements illustrated in Fig. 4 correlated quite nicely according to Eq. 4, and have
relatively small virtual origins as summarized in
Table 2. On the other hand, flame lengths differ
considerably for the various test conditions with
present space-based flames clearly longer than
the rest: this behavior is quantified by the values
of Cf summarized in Table 2. Reasons for this
behavior are discussed next.
The results closest to the present measurements in Fig. 4 are based on a correlation of
earlier measurements of luminous flame lengths
of nonbuoyant soot-containing flames for test
conditions similar to the present measurements
except carried out at low gravity using the
KC-135 aircraft facility [14]. These low-gravity
tests were completed to assist the development
of the present space-based microgravity experiments so that burner properties were the same
and laminar smoke point conditions were approached. Finally, available times at low gravity
were relatively long, roughly 20 s, to minimize
potential effects of unsteadiness. Thus, these
test conditions provided reasonably close simulations of the present space-based microgravity
experiments. Nevertheless, the best-fit correlations of the two sets of measurements indicate
that the space-based flames are consistently
longer, by roughly 40%, than the flames observed using the KC-135 facility. These differences are attributed to well-known effects of
disturbances of the gravitational field when using aircraft facilities (g-jitter) with enhanced
mixing due to these disturbances tending to
reduce luminous flame lengths.
The results next closest to the present measurements in Fig. 4 are based on a correlation of
earlier measurements of luminous flame lengths
of buoyant soot-containing flames for test conditions similar to the present experiments except carried out at normal gravity [26]. These
tests were completed to assist development of
the present space-based experiments so that
burner properties were the same and laminar

K.-C. LIN ET AL.

426

smoke point conditions were approached. Similar to other observations of buoyant soot-containing laminar jet diffusion flames [19], these
flames provide the linear correlation between
luminous flame lengths and fuel flow rates
mentioned earlier. Nevertheless, the present
space-based flames are roughly twice as long as
the buoyant flames, due to the absence of
enhanced mixing caused by convection effects
resulting from buoyant motion.
The last series of luminous flame lengths
illustrated in Fig. 4 are due to Sunderland et al.
[13] and yield a laminar flame length correlation
very similar to the results for buoyant flames but
for very different reasons. The luminous flame
length measurements of Sunderland et al. [13]
involved nonbuoyant soot-free (blue) methane-,
ethane-, and propane-fueled round laminar jet
diffusion flames burning in still air at microgravity using a 2.2 s drop tower facility. The burner
properties were similar to the present spacebased experiments. As noted earlier, burner
diameters, fuel flow rates and ambient pressures
were manipulated in order to eliminate the
presence of soot so that blue flames were observed whose location could be associated with
the position of the stoichiometric flame sheet.
These same tactics also reduced characteristic
flame residence times to minimize effects of
transient flame development. The luminous
flame lengths of Sunderland et al. [13] exhibit
somewhat greater scatter than the present
space-based laminar flame lengths (see Fig. 3)
when correlated according to Eq. 4; this behavior is probably due to ignition disturbances and
flame development effects caused by the limited
available test time at microgravity. Nevertheless, a reasonably good correlation between
predictions and measurements is achieved.
(Note that Sunderland et al. [13] also compare
their luminous flame lengths to predictions
from Burke and Schumann [2], Roper [21] and
Klajn and Oppenheim [24].). The luminous
flame lengths of the present space-based flames,
however, are roughly twice as long as the nonbuoyant soot-free flames; this difference is felt
to be mainly due to the different locations of the
luminous flame length and the stoichiometric
flame sheet as the laminar smoke point is
approached, as discussed earlier. Notably, Sunderland and co-workers [15, 16] find similar

differences between these two locations along
the axis of their weakly-buoyant flames as the
laminar smoke point is approached for similar
fuels, which tends to support this conclusion.
Flame Diameters
The normalized maximum flame diameter,
wMAXZst/d, is simply a constant value, 0.563,
according to Eq. 3. This implies that maximum
flame diameters for nonbuoyant laminar jet
diffusion flames burning in still air are only
functions of the jet exit diameter and the stoichiometry, and are remarkably independent of
parameters associated with fuel flow rates and
transport properties, such as Re and Sc. Another parameter of interest is the flame diameter at the mid-point of the flame, £ = 1/2. This
parameter can be readily found from Eq. 5, as
follows:
wl/2ZJd = 0.557 at

f = 1/2.

(7)

Thus, WMAX and w l / 2 are essentially the same,
mainly because the streamwise locations of
these positions are not very different. Thus,
flame diameter results will be presented in the
following as WMAX in order to avoid cluttering
the plots.
As noted earlier, the blue stoichiometric
boundaries could not be identified for the
present test flames due to the adjustment limitations of the color video camera. Thus, the
maximum luminous flame diameter was found
from the luminous boundaries of the sootcontaining region, similar to the present luminous flame lengths. Measurements of radial
temperature distributions in the vicinity of the
maximum flame diameter (see Urban et al. [27]
for some typical examples) suggest that the
stoichiometric flame sheet was just outside
these boundaries.
Measured and predicted normalized maximum flame diameters, wMAXZst/d, are plotted
as a function of normalized luminous flame
lengths in Fig. 5. Present measurements for
both ethylene- and propane-fueled flames are
shown. The predicted correlation of Eq. 3, along
with the best-fit values of the measurements for
the ethylene- and propane-fueled flames are
also shown on the plot.

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
U.B

CORRELATION
NONSOC
( TYP.)
FOR C3H8~\
0.6

\

".
_---

•**
.

9
•D

•^0.4

'

/ /
/

. CORRELATION /
FOR C2H4

/

l_ SOOTING
(TYP.)

THEORY—'
0.2 •

•
^
()

FUEL SYMBOL Zst
C2H4
m,a
0.064
C3Hg
•
0.060
,

,
10

.

,
20

,

-

-

,

40

effective predictions of flame widths from Eq. 2,
it becomes clear that the larger jet exit diameter
is mainly responsible for the larger flame diameters, and smaller flame aspect ratios, for the
luminous flame boundaries of Tests 05E, 06E,
and 08E illustrated in Fig. 2 (see Table 1).
Finally, the effectiveness of the predictions of
Eq. 3 are somewhat startling because the results
cannot be fitted to the measurements by appropriately selecting a condition to estimate mean
transport properties in the same manner as the
luminous flame length correlation.
Flame Shapes

1

30

427

5

(L f L 0 )/d
Fig. 5. Measured and predicted luminous flame diameters
of nonbuoyant hydrocarbon/air laminar jet diffusion flames;
measurements from present space-based experiments.

The experimental results illustrated in Fig. 5
are in remarkably good agreement with the
predictions. There is a slight tendency for WMAX
to increase with increasing luminous flame
lengths but present flames are relatively long,
(L{ - L0)ld > 10, and maximum flame diameters are essentially independent of flame
length, agreeing with the trend predicted by the
theory. The measured normalized maximum
luminous flame diameters are slightly scattered
about the prediction, with the best fit values of
0.518 and 0.647 for the ethylene- and propanefueled flames, respectively, compared with the
theoretical prediction of 0.563. The locations of
the normalized maximum flame diameters for
closed-tip flames also correspond reasonably
well to estimates from Eq. 3, i.e., they are
observed at roughly the mid-point of the flame;
see Test 03E illustrated in Fig. 1. The maximum
flame diameters for the blunt-tipped and
opened-tip flames are observed beyond the midpoint toward the tip of the flames, see the
flames illustrated in Fig. 2. This may help explain why the average values of wMAXZst/d for
the present propane-fueled flames is larger than
the value of this parameter for the ethylenefueled flames, because most of the propanefueled flames have the opened-tip configuration; see Fig. 2. Thus, based on the rather

Present predicted and measured luminous
flame shapes are compared in the following as a
final step in the evaluation of the effectiveness
of Eq. 4 due to Spalding [22] for correlating
luminous flame shape data. This comparison is
illustrated in Fig. 6 for some typical closed-tip
flames, with the radial position of the luminous
flame boundary plotted directly as a function of
streamwise distance. The predictions shown in
the figure were computed as described in connection with Figs. 3-5, using the best fit values
of Cf and LJd given in Table 2. The agreement
between measurements and predictions is seen
to be excellent for Tests 03E and 16E in spite of
the complexity of the flame processes that define the location of the luminous flame boundaries and the simplicity of the Spalding [22]
theory. The comparison between measurements
and predictions is not quite as good for Test 18P
in the region near the flame tip, however,
because this is a relatively blunt closed-tip flame
as discussed in connection with Fig. 5.
Measured and predicted luminous flame
boundaries for opened-tip ethylene- and propane-fueled flames are plotted in Figs. 7 and 8,
respectively. It is evident that the flame length
predictions remain reasonably good for these
opened-tip flames but the shapes of the tips of
the flames are not predicted very well. Such
behavior is certainly not surprising because the
theory does not consider processes of flame
extinction along the axis and the formation of
an annular soot layer. Nevertheless, the fortuitous qualitative agreement between measurements and predictions should still be helpful for
estimating the flame-containing region of non-

428

K.-C. LIN ET AL.

40ro3E,50kPa

40 r

16E,

30

65 kPa

40 r-18P, 80 kPa

30 -

MEASURED
LUMINOUS
BOUNDARY
(TYP.)

30

20

"E
10

10

I

/\THEORY
/
(TYP.)

-10

-10

0

0

10

10
r (mm)

r (mm)

buoyant laminar jet diffusion flames when imaging systems are designed for nonintrusive
measurements of flame properties, if this finding proves to be robust for reasonable ranges of
test conditions.
Measured and predicted luminous flame
shapes for the present nonbuoyant laminar jet
40 f 05E. 65 kPa

diffusion flames are plotted according to the
normalized variables of Eq. 4 in Figs. 9 and 10
for selected closed-tip and opened-tip flames,
respectively. Predictions shown on these plots
were obtained as described in connection with
Figs. 3 and 5. As expected from the results
discussed thus far, the agreement between mea40 r 08E, 50 kPa

40 r 06E, 80 kPa

30

MEASURED
LUMINOUS
BOUNDARY
(TYP.)
30

20

20

THEORY
'(TYP.)
30

20

E
E

E

E

10

10

10

NOZZLE
(TYP.)

-10

-10
0

10
r (mm)

Fig. 6. Measured and predicted
luminous flame shapes for typical closed-tip nonbuoyant hydrocarbon/air laminar jet diffusion flames;
measurements
from present space-based experiments (Tests 03E, 16E, and
18P).

-10
0

10
r (mm)

0

10
r (mm)

Fig. 1. Measured and predicted
luminous flame shapes for typical opened-tip nonbuoyant
ethylene/air laminar jet diffusion flames; measurements
from present space-based experiments (Tests 05E, 06E, and
08E).

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
40

40 r 12P, 100kPa

40 r up, 65 kPa

30

20

30

20

E
E

E
E

E

10

10

10

- 13P, 80kPa

MEASURED
LUMINOUS
BOUNDARY
(TYP.)
3°

20

THEORY
(TYP.)

429

NOZZLE
"(TYP.)

-10

-10
10

0
r (mm)

-10
10

0

surements and predictions is excellent for the
closed-tip flames in Fig. 9, except for the blunttipped flames that are seen as the laminar
smoke point fuel flow rate is approached. The
opened-tip luminous flame shapes are not predicted as well, with significant discrepancies

10

0
r (mm)

r (mm)

Fig. 8. Measured and predicted
luminous flame shapes for typical opened-tip nonbuoyant
propane/air laminar jet diffusion flames; measurements
from present space-based experiments (Tests IIP, 12P, and
13P).

observed between measurements and predictions as the flame tip is approached. In addition,
the tendency for opened-tip flames to be broadest near the flame tip, as opposed to the midpoint as indicated by theory, is evident. Nevertheless, the qualitative agreement between

TEST SYM. TEST SYM.
05E
•
10P
06E
•
11P
08E
••
12P
09P
<
13P

0

Fig. 9. Measured and predicted normalized luminous flame
shapes for closed-tip nonbuoyant hydrocarbon/air laminar
jet diffusion flames; measurements from present spacebased experiments.

0.2

0.4

0.6

Fig. 10. Measured and predicted normalized luminous
flame shapes for opened-tip nonbuoyant hydrocarbon/air
laminar jet diffusion flames; measurements from present
space-based experiments.

430

measurements and predictions, even for
opened-tip flames, is quite good considering the
simplicity of the model.
CONCLUSIONS
The luminous flame shapes of steady, nonbuoyant, round laminar jet diffusion flames were
studied at microgravity during long-term tests
carried out in an orbiting space shuttle. Test
conditions involved ethylene- and propane-fueled flames burning in still air at ambient temperatures of 300 K, ambient pressures of 35-130
kPa, initial jet diameters of 1.6 and 2.7 mm, and
jet exit Reynolds numbers of 45-170 to yield
luminous flame lengths of 15-63 mm. These
test conditions involved soot-containing luminous flames near laminar smoke point conditions, and included both nonsooting and sooting
flames. The new measurements were used to
evaluate predictions of luminous flame shapes
based on the simple classical theory of nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames due to Spalding
[22]. The major conclusions of the study are as
follows:
1. The present soot-containing luminous flames
had larger luminous flame lengths than earlier ground-based observations: 40% larger
than the luminous flame lengths of sootcontaining nonbuoyant flames observed using an aircraft (KC-135) facility due to reduced effects of gravitational disturbances
(g-jitter), roughly twice as large as the luminous flame lengths of soot-containing buoyant flames at normal gravity due to the
absence of effects of buoyant mixing, and
roughly twice as large as the luminous flame
lengths of soot-free nonbuoyant flames observed by Sunderland et al. [13] using drop
tower facilities due to the presence of soot
luminosity and possible reduced effects of
unsteadiness.
2. Similar to earlier observations of soot-containing nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion
flames [7-12, 14], present luminous flame
shapes could be grouped into closed-tip and
opened-tip configurations, which were observed for fuel flow rates smaller and larger
than the laminar smoke point fuel flow rate,
respectively. Blunt-tipped flames were also

K.-C. LIN ET AL.
observed as fuel flow rates approached the
tip-opening condition.
3. The simplified theoretical analysis of nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames due to
Spalding [22] yielded excellent correlations
of the luminous flame shapes of closed-tip
soot-containing and soot-free flames upon
adjusting an empirical flame length parameter to account for the fact that flame luminosity ends at the location of soot consumption and at the location of the stoichiometric
flame sheet along the axis of soot-containing
and soot-free flames, respectively. Nevertheless, the slopes of the flame length correlations in Fig. 4 differed by roughly a factor of
2 for nonbuoyant soot-free (blue) and sootcontaining (near the laminar smoke point
limit) flames. This difference is consistent,
however, with the ratios between luminous
flame lengths and stoichiometric lengths for
soot-containing flames reported previously
[15-18].,
4. Remarkably, the simplified theoretical analysis of nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion
flames due to Spalding [22] fortuitously still
yields reasonably good predictions of luminous flame shapes for soot-containing nonbuoyant opened-tip flames as well as for
conventional buoyant flames, after appropriate selections of empirical flame length parameters. Thus, taken together, the simple
formulation of Eq. 4 exhibits encouraging
potential to correlate the luminous flame
boundaries of laminar jet diffusion flames
that should be useful for designing imaging
systems for nonintrusive measurements of
flame properties.
5. Based on the present correlations of luminous flame boundaries for nonbuoyant laminar jet diffusion flames, luminous flame
lengths increase linearly with fuel flow rate
but are relatively independent of jet exit
diameter and pressure, while maximum luminous flame diameters increase linearly with
jet exit diameter but are relatively independent of fuel flow rate and pressure. Both
dimensions, however, are proportional to the
stoichiometric mixture fraction, although this
parameter was not varied sufficiently during
the present experiments to test predictions of
this trend.

NONBUOYANT LAMINAR JET DIFFUSION FLAMES
The correlation of Eq. 4 from Spalding [22]
should be used with caution outside the present
test range. Additional experiments are needed
to evaluate this expression during long-term
space-based tests at microgravity, emphasizing
evaluation of effects of approach to the laminar
smoke point and the relationship between the
locations of the luminous flame boundaries due
to the presence of soot and the location of the
stoichiometric flame sheet.
This research was supported by NASA grant
nos. NAG3-1245 and NAG3-2048 under the overall technical management of Howard B. Ross of
the NASA Lewis Research Center. The authors
would l^ce to acknowledge the contributions ofR.
Hager, A. Over, R. Chucksa, and their associates
at NASA LeRC to the development and operation
of the test apparatus; to G. T. Linteris, J. E. Voss,
and R. Crouch of the NASA Johnson Space
Center who carried out the assembly of the test
apparatus and the execution of the experiments on
orbit; and to Z. Dai of The University of Michigan
who helped with the collection of the data.
REFERENCES
1. Bilger, R. W., Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 1:87 (1976).
2. Burke, S. P., and Schumann, T. E. W., Ind. Eng. Chem.
20:998 (1928).
3. Law, C. K., and Faeth, G. M., Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci. 20:65 (1994).
4. Cochran, T. H., and Masica, W. J., Thirteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1970, p. 821.
5. Haggard, J. B., Jr., and Cochran, T. H., Combust. Sci
Tech. 5:291 (1972).
6. Edelman, R. B., Fortune, O. F., Weilerstein, G.,
Cochran, T. H., and Haggard, J. B., Jr., Fourteenth
Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, 1972, p. 399.
7. Edelman, R. B., and Bahadori, M. Y., Ada Astronautica 13:681 (1986).
8. Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Stocker, D. P., and
Olson, S. L., AlAA J. 28:236 (1990).

431

9. Bahadori, M. Y., Stocker, D. P., and Edelman, R. B.,
AIAA Paper No. 90-0691, 1990.
10. Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Sotos, R. G., and
Stocker, D. P., AIAA Paper No. 91-0719, 1991.
11. Bahadori, M. Y., Edelman, R. B., Stocker, D. P., Sotos,
R. G., and Vaughan, D. F., AIAA Paper No. 92-0243,
1992.
12. Bahadori, M. Y., Stocker, D. P., Vaughan, D. F., Zhou,
L., and Edelman, R. B., in Modem Developments in
Energy, Combustion and Spectroscopy (F. A. Williams
et al., eds.), Pergamon, New York, 1993, Chapt. 4.
13. Sunderland, P. B., Mendelson, B. J., Yuan, Z.-G., and
Urban, D. L., Combust. Flame 116:376-386 (1998).
14. Sunderland, P. B., Mortazavi, S., Faeth, G. M., and
Urban, D. L., Combust. Flame 96:97 (1994).
15. Sundertand, P. B., Koylii, 0. O., and Faeth, G. M.,
Combust. Flame 100:310 (1995).
16. Sunderland, P. B., Ph.D. thesis, The University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1995.
17. Mitchell, R. E., Sarofim, A. F., and Clomburg, L. A.,
Combust Flame 37:227 (1980).
18. Saito, K., Williams, F. A., and Gordon, A. S., Combust.
Sci. Tech. 47:117(1986).
19. Schug, K. P., Manheimer-Timnat, Y., Yaccarino, P.,
and Glassman, I., Combust. Sci. Tech. 22:235 (1980).
20. Jost, W., Explosion and Combustion Processes in Cases,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1946.
21. Roper, F. G., Combust. Flame 29:219 (1977).
22. Spalding, D. B., Combustion and Mass Transfer, Pergamon, New York, 1979, p. 185.
23. Kuo, K. K., Principles of Combustion, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1986, p. 360.
24. Klajn, M., and Oppenheim, A. K., Nineteenth Symposium (International) on Combustion, The Combustion
Institute, Pittsburgh, 1982, p. 223.
25. Li, S. C., Gordon, A. S., and Williams, F. A., Combust.
Sci. Tech. 104:75 (1995).
26. Ban, H., Venkatesh, S., and Saito, K., /. Heat Trans.
116:954 (1994).
27. Urban, D. L., Yuang, Z.-G., Sunderland, P. B., Linteris, G. T., Voss, J. E., Lin, K.-C, Dai, Z., Sun, K., and
Faeth, G. M.,AIAA J. 36:1346 (1998).
28. Braun, W. G., Danner, R. P., and Daubert, T. E.,
Technical Data Book—Petroleum Refining, 3rd ed.,
American Petroleum Institute, Washington, 1976,
Chapters 11 and 13.

Received 6 May 1998; revised 22 June 1998; accepted 25 June
1998.

