NASA/CP—2003-212103

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human
Exploration and Utilization of Space
Proceedings and Research Plan

April 2003

The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to
the advancement of aeronautics and space
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part
in helping NASA maintain this important role.

•

CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
papers from scientific and technical
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
NASA.

The NASA STI Program Office is operated by
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for
NASA’s scientific and technical information. The
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’s institutional
mechanism for disseminating the results of its
research and development activities. These results
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report
Series, which includes the following report types:

•

SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
technical, or historical information from
NASA programs, projects, and missions,
often concerned with subjects having
substantial public interest.

•

TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. Englishlanguage translations of foreign scientific
and technical material pertinent to NASA’s
mission.

•

•

•

TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major significant
phase of research that present the results of
NASA programs and include extensive data
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
of significant scientific and technical data and
information deemed to be of continuing
reference value. NASA’s counterpart of peerreviewed formal professional papers but
has less stringent limitations on manuscript
length and extent of graphic presentations.
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
reports, working papers, and bibliographies
that contain minimal annotation. Does not
contain extensive analysis.
CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.

Specialized services that complement the STI
Program Office’s diverse offerings include
creating custom thesauri, building customized
databases, organizing and publishing research
results . . . even providing videos.
For more information about the NASA STI
Program Office, see the following:
•

Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
at http://www.sti.nasa.gov

•

E-mail your question via the Internet to
help@sti.nasa.gov

•

Fax your question to the NASA Access
Help Desk at 301–621–0134

•

Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
301–621–0390

•

Write to:
NASA Access Help Desk
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human
Exploration and Utilization of Space
Proceedings and Research Plan

Proceedings of a conference held at and sponsored by the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio
June 25–26, 2001

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center

April 2003

Contents were reproduced from author-provided
presentation materials.

Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22100

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov

Preface
The purpose of the workshop documented in this publication was to bring together personnel
responsible for the design and operations of the International Space Station (ISS) and the fire protection
research community to review the current knowledge in fire safety relative to spacecraft. From this
review, research needs were identified that were then used to formulate a research plan with specific
objectives. The time and effort spent by the presenters, working group moderators, and participants to
attend this workshop and share their knowledge in fire safety is greatly appreciated. I would also like to
thank Ms. Christine Gorecki and Ms. Sandi Jones of the National Center for Microgravity Research in
Fluids and Combustion for coordinating the local arrangements and travel of all the attendees. Their
efforts ensured that participants arrived ready to address the significant concerns of fire safety in
spacecraft.
In this document, I have attempted to capture the very informative and lively discussions that
occurred in the plenary sessions and the working groups. I hope that it will be useful to readers and serve
as a significant step in assuring fire protection for the crews of current and future spacecraft.
Gary A. Ruff
Workshop Technical Coordinator
Spacecraft Fire Safety Project Scientist
NASA John H. Glenn Research Center

NASA/CP—2003-212103

iii

Table of Contents
Page
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................vii
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................1
Synopses of Previous Workshops on Spacecraft Fire Safety .................................................................1
Approach .......................................................................................................................................................3
Summary of the Working Groups .................................................................................................................4
Smoke and Fire Detection.......................................................................................................................4
Fire Prevention and Material Flammability............................................................................................7
Fire and Post-Fire Response .................................................................................................................10
Spacecraft Fire Safety Research Plan..........................................................................................................14
References ...................................................................................................................................................15
Appendix—Plenary Presentations...............................................................................................................17
Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space
Dr. Gary A. Ruff, NASA Glenn Research Center ................................................................................19
Spacecraft Fire Safety: A Human Space Flight Program Perspective
Dr. Michael D. Pedley, NASA Johnson Space Center .........................................................................27
Control of Materials Flammability Hazards
Dr. Dennis E. Griffin, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center................................................................35
Overview of ISS U.S. Fire Detection and Suppression System
Ms. Alana Whitaker, NASA Johnson Space Center.............................................................................49
An Introduction to Mars ISPP Technologies
Dr. Dale E. Lueck, NASA Kennedy Space Center...............................................................................65
List of Attendees .........................................................................................................................................79

NASA/CP—2003-212103

v

Executive Summary
On June 25–26, 2001, 64 people representing combustion research and fire prevention professionals
from NASA, industry, military, and academia met in Cleveland, Ohio, to participate in a workshop
entitled “Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space.” The
objective of this workshop was to bring together experts in various disciplines related to spacecraft fire
safety to (1) identify research needed to ensure fire safety in future shuttle and International Space Station
(ISS) systems and payloads, (2) promote ISS fire safety through proposals for innovative designs,
operations, and validation procedures, (3) identify areas of concern inherent to prolonged human-crew
missions in Earth orbit and beyond, and (4) anticipate research required to plan and design spacecraft and
habitats for long-duration space missions and planetary exploration. The outcome of this workshop was a
list of immediate and long-term areas of concern regarding fire safety in manned spaceflight.
Workshop attendees participated in one of three working groups depending on their area of expertise
and interest. These working groups had the following focus areas:
1. Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
2. Smoke and Fire Detection
3. Fire and Post-Fire Response
Each of the working groups began their deliberations by assessing the current knowledge and “state of the
art” in their respective focus areas. At the discretion of the working group chairs, short presentations were
made to review current research in the appropriate areas. Based on this assessment, topics requiring
additional information and/or technical understanding to guide flight system design and flight procedures
were identified. The working groups then suggested research directions and topics to obtain the required
data. The findings of each working group were presented to the workshop attendees during the closing
session and opened for discussion. The working group moderators provided written documentation of the
conclusions of their group in addition to their presentations. After the workshop, a 10-year research plan
was developed that incorporated the inputs provided during the workshop. The overall objective of the
research conducted in this plan is to provide data for the rational design of fire safety systems for manned
spacecraft and significantly improve crew and system safety from fires.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

vii

Introduction
Space travel is an inherently dangerous activity making crew health and safety of primary concern in
the space program. The vehicle structure and the crew are exposed to high levels of stress, and the hostile
external environment makes escape and rescue nearly impossible. Many potential hazards can arise in
space operations, among which are fire, atmospheric contamination, injury, explosion, loss of pressure,
and meteoroid and debris penetration. These are examples of prompt-effect hazards, that is, those
requiring immediate response for alleviation. Space operations are also subject to delayed-effect hazards,
which are those requiring less urgent or timely response, such as contamination, hidden damage, and
corrosion. Fire is one of the foremost prompt-effect hazards, but it also contributes to the delayed-effect
hazards. Hence, fire-protection strategies must cover the restoration, repair, and cleanup activities after a
fire event in addition to the obvious prevention and control before and during a fire.
Probably the most important factor distinguishing spacecraft fire protection from terrestrial
procedures in extreme environments (e.g., submarines and aircraft) is the strong influence of the lowgravity environment that dominates fire and particulate behavior and control in spacecraft. The substantial
upward buoyant flow generated by large density gradients in fires at 1-g is practically eliminated in
spacecraft. Heat and mass-transport rates – and consequently ignition, flammability, fire characteristics,
and flame-spread rates – vary considerably from those experienced in conventional, terrestrial fires. At
partial gravity levels, the effects of buoyancy, convection, and diffusion can combine to produce unique
combustion results. Thus, fire prevention, detection, and suppression practices for spacecraft and
extraterrestrial habitats must be developed specifically to respond to the unique aspects of microgravity
combustion.
Synopses of Previous Workshops on Spacecraft Fire Safety
At least three workshops to assess existing knowledge in spacecraft fire safety and guide research
efforts have been held in the last sixteen years. The participants of the current workshop did not
specifically review the outcomes of these previous workshops, so comparison of the outcomes can be
viewed as an evolution of the research needs brought about by continuing advances in knowledge and
new mission objectives. In fact, some of the participants of the current workshop also attended one or
more of the previous workshops and they have helped shape the spacecraft fire safety research that has
been conducted over the last fifteen years. A short synopsis of these previous workshops is given below.
In 1986, a workshop entitled “Spacecraft Fire Safety” was held with the results published in NASA
CP 2476 (Ref. 1) and a conference paper (Ref. 2). This workshop, held in Cleveland, Ohio and sponsored
by NASA Lewis Research Center, began with a symposium with ten original survey papers on the
following ten topics related to fire safety.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Techniques for fire detection
Fire-related standards and testing
Fire extinguishment and inhibition in spacecraft environments
Inerting and atmospheres
Fire-related medical science
Aircraft fire safety research
Space Station internal environmental and safety concerns
Microgravity combustion fundamentals
Spacecraft material flammability testing and configurations
Ignition and combustion of metals in oxygen

NASA/CP—2003-212103

1

At the conclusion of these lectures, five forums were convened to develop recommendations for research
and technology. These forums and the recommendations from each are given below:
Fire detection and ignition
a. Study of detection of overheated and smoldering components, with emphasis on the development
of heat-sensitive coatings
b. Improvement of sensing systems, and incorporation of multiple fire-signature decision software
c. Development of central detector systems for command of localized sensing stations
d. Study of fire signatures expected in low gravity and nonstandard atmospheres
e. Inventory of spacecraft equipment and procedures to anticipate hazards and locate sensors
Fire extinguishment
a. Fundamental research on combustion and suppression in microgravity and space-unique
environments
b. Testing and evaluation of candidate suppressants
c. Development of specific extinguishment and inerting techniques for hazardous areas of the
spacecraft
d. Planning for post-fire atmosphere cleanup
e. Establishment of cooperative working groups to pursue analogies between space and submarine
research
Human responses to combustion products and inert atmospheres
a. Revision of material acceptance standards to test toxicology of emission products
b. Emphasis on human responses in establishing fire safety policies
c. Study of combustion, pyrolysis, and extinguishment products expected in microgravity
d. Update of human tolerance limits to pollutants and reduced-oxygen atmospheres
e. Designation and training of at least one spacecraft crew member as a fire marshal on each mission
Spacecraft materials and configurations
a. Further flammability testing in low-gravity environments
b. Further testing on overheating and product generation from common materials
c. Further long-term material testing to include aging effects
d. Establishment of data banks to share and correlate space, aircraft, and ground fire models
Selection of spacecraft atmospheres
a. Research and technology programs on alternative spacecraft cabin atmospheres
b. Research on combustion, pyrolysis, and smoldering in all atmospheres
c. Establishment of data banks to collect knowledge on fire behavior in unusual environments
d. Further research on atmospheric contamination by extinguishants
A second workshop was held at the University of California, Los Angeles, on October 31–
November 1, 1991 to review progress and topics related to the Risk-Based Fire Safety Experiment
Project. This project was sponsored the NASA In-Space Technology Experiment Program (IN-STEP) and
its principal goal was to develop and perform experiments based on Probabilistic Risk Assessment needs
that will be used in models to quantify fire risk in humans-crew spacecraft (Ref. 3). The presentations and
subsequent discussions were intended to guide the UCLA and NASA investigators on the state of
knowledge and perceived needs in spacecraft fire safety and its risk management. The workshop
consisted of formal presentations on current safety practices related to design-to-preclude strategies and
material selection, probabilistic risk assessments, combustion science in spacecraft environments, and the
specific hazard of smoke in spacecraft. While hardcopies of the presentations can be found in the
workshop report (Ref. 3), the general findings were (1) that Probabilistic Safety Assessment methods

NASA/CP—2003-212103

2

would be a great value to the design and operation of future manned spacecraft, (2) the importance of
understanding and testing of smoldering as a likely fire scenario in space, and (3) the need for smoke
damage modeling to better predict damage by this mechanism.
A third workshop entitled “Research for Space Exploration: Physical Sciences and Process
Technologies,” sponsored by the Microgravity Research Division of NASA was held in Cleveland in
1997. The broad research priorities for spacecraft fire safety developed in this workshop are documented
in reference 4 and were as follows:
1. Research on electrical system diagnostics to provide an early, pre-incident warning to
breakdowns, possibly resistivity or continuity checks.
2. Determination of flammability, flame spread, flame luminosity, limiting oxygen, and soot sizes
under various atmospheres for thick materials and polymers at 1/3 g.
3. Determination of flame sizes, soot sizes, and flammability from thick materials with imposed heat
flux under microgravity conditions.
4. Determination of combustion limits, ignitability, and flame luminosity of premixed methane and
oxygen for propulsion and fire safety.
5. Research on fundamental behavior of various gaseous, liquid suppressants, and solid-surface fires
at 1/3 g and microgravity with modeling and experiment verification.
While many of these remain as relevant research areas, the missions for which fire safety research is
required are constantly evolving. Instead of developing knowledge of fire safety procedures and systems
for the initial occupancy of the International Space Station, we are now concerned with maintaining,
validating, and improving fire safety on the ISS throughout its lifetime while providing maximum
flexibility in the types of experiments and operations that can be conducted. We must also look forward to
the special fire safety requirements for travel to and habitation of the Moon and Mars. Research needs for
these applications may include:
•
•
•
•

Evaluation of fire initiation hazards arising from waste disposal, trash storage, laundry, household
activities, and the storage of fuel gas and oxygen systems
Development of technology for the efficient detection systems required for long-duration
missions in terms of rapid response, discrimination, false-alarm rejection, multiple-sensor logic,
etc.
Identification and evaluation of new suppression agents and techniques required for long-range
missions, Lunar or Martian habitation, and in-situ resource utilization (ISRU) extinguishment
Identification of fire safety issues in ISRU operations such as operations at high temperature and
pressures, oxygen handling, propellant storage, and safety in welding and thermal operations

Approach
To identify and address these issues, researchers and specialists from academia, industry, national
laboratories, and NASA who work in the various theme areas of spacecraft fire safety such as applied
combustion science and technology; environment control and life support; material flammability testing
and fire prevention; spacecraft, habitat, and ISS design; and fire detection and suppression have been
invited to this workshop. The workshop consisted of:
•
•

Brief presentations reviewing spacecraft fire safety objectives in NASA’s Bio-Astronautics
Initiative, current spacecraft fire safety research, and goals for the workshop
Three simultaneous working groups each led by moderators who were responsible for
directing and focusing the discussion on the theme area

NASA/CP—2003-212103

3

•

Presentation of the recommendations and prioritizations for future research by the discussion
group leaders to the workshop participants

The three working groups had the following theme areas:
1. Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
2. Smoke and Fire Detection
3. Fire and Post-Fire Response
Group leaders and co-leaders for each group were identified prior to the workshop. In consultation with
the workshop technical organizer, participants were placed into one of the three working groups to allow
them to prepare for the discussions. All participants were notified of their assignments and fellow group
members in advance of the workshop. The group leaders were tasked with moderating the discussion and
providing a written synopsis of the discussion and findings of their group as well as copies of their oral
presentation prior to leaving the workshop. These summaries were used to produce the reports presented
in the next section.

Summary of the Working Groups
The summaries of the three working groups are presented in this section. These summaries have been
developed from the written reports supplied by the working group leaders as well as the oral presentations
of the findings delivered to all participants during the closing session of the workshop. The working
groups had freedom in developing and evaluating topics during their deliberations. To ensure that no
information or continuity of thought was lost while preparing these summaries, no effort was made to
standardize the format of the results from the groups.
Smoke and Fire Detection
Moderators:

Dr. David L. Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center
Dr. Tom Cleary, National Institute of Standards and Technology

This group consisted of 15 participants (see List of Attendees). The group began its work by
brainstorming ideas for issues and concerns and, from these, identifying research areas. These were then
sorted and presented to all workshop participants during the closing session.
By nature, smoke and fire detection is a technology-driven aspect of fire protection. Improvements in
sensor technology can be implemented in a fire or smoke detector to allow them to respond faster and
more reliably to a fire threat. However, advancement in technology is a necessary but not sufficient step
for the improvement of smoke and fire detectors. Designers must also know what these sensors should be
looking for. For example, the Comparative Soot Diagnostics (CSD) experiment that flew in the Glovebox
on STS-75 demonstrated that the microgravity performance of the fire detectors could be different from
their 1-g performance. This performance difference was attributed to the growth of larger smoke particles
in 0-g because of the increased residence time in high smoke concentration regions (Ref. 5).
Issues and Concerns
The group began by formulating consensus statements and issues that served as a starting point for
discussions. First, there was a generally recognized paucity of data to guide the development of fire
detection systems in spacecraft. This was one of the greatest concerns of this working group. Therefore,
the group focused on defining the issues and concerns related to the design and operation of fire detection

NASA/CP—2003-212103

4

systems on spacecraft to identify data required to provide the needed data. This list of issues and concerns
were postulated in the form of questions related to the operation of current systems and are identified in
Table 1. They are divided into issues relating to the detector operation, crew response, and some general
issues. These issues existed primarily because of the lack of knowledge of one or more fundamental
aspects of fire behavior in a low-gravity, spacecraft environment.
Relationships between the identified issues and concerns were then examined to identify areas of
research required to address these concerns. This analysis resulted in the identification of three major and
three minor research areas, again posed as research questions. In these research areas, specific types of
data or analyses were identified that would address the research question. Research that was most critical
to address the issues was identified as near-term.
Table 1. Issues and Concerns for Smoke and Fire Detection Systems
Issue
Smoke and Fire Detection
1. What should we detect?
2. Where do we put the detectors?
3. Does the detector produce frequent nuisance alarms?
4. Will it detect all types of fires?
5. How does the sensor respond to reduced visibility?
Crew Response
6. Is detection quick enough to give crew adequate time to respond?
7. How does the crew know where the fire is?
8. How should the crew respond, how will they respond?
9. Can the sensor give an indication of the indicate danger level?
10 What capability is required for post-fire sensing (toxicity & corrosion)?
General
11. Will current systems/procedures work?
12. What are the risks outside of the crew cabin?
13. What is the effect of partial gravity on fire signature and detector response?

Research Questions
1. What are we looking for?
a. Target and high-risk fire definitions
b. Fire signatures
c. Threshold settings and background levels
d. What aren’t we looking for?
2.

When and how do we respond?
a. Levels of response/automation
b. Nuisance levels (impact on human response)
c. Human factors

3.

How do we design and place detectors?
a. Technology/modality
b. Air flow in modules
c. Automation (detection and response)
d. Sampling

NASA/CP—2003-212103

5

e.
f.
g.
h.

Integration into ISS
Requirements
Risk Assessment
Annunciation technique

4.

What post-fire detection is needed?

5.

What fire detection/protection systems are required for uninhabited regions of spacecraft?

6.

How are the fire signatures and detector response different in partial-gravity environments?

Of these research questions identified above, the first three were considered as the highest priority.
The group also realized that technology exists to address these questions but had yet to be applied to this
task. To address “What are we looking for?” The working group felt that the identification of a target or
high-risk fire and the determination of fire signatures was the most immediate, near-term research that
should be accomplished. In research question 2, all three sub-areas, i.e., evaluation of the level of
response and degree of automation that should be used to respond to a fire, the elimination of nuisance
alarms, and other human factors related to the response of the crew to a fire were identified as potential
near-term research areas.
Enabling Technologies
The greatest enabling technology for improved smoke and fire detection are the development of
small, robust sensors that can detect very small amounts of a wide variety of fire signatures. This includes
sensors that measure CO, CO2, HCl, hydrocarbons, and smoke. These sensors can be made in several
forms including solid-state MEMS sensors, and various gas absorption techniques. Each method has its
advantages and disadvantages but they are still under development. Concurrent development of these
systems is being done so that their response to an actual fire can be adequately evaluated.
Many of these technologies will allow a fire or smoke detector to be considerably smaller and use less
power than existing instruments. This could allow a distributed network of detectors operated by a
distributed intelligence system. A system of this type composed of different types of detectors could have
a very low incidence of nuisance alarms, more rapidly locate the fire, and even dispense suppressant to a
specified location.
In the course of these discussions, the group realized the dichotomy between physical factors and
human factors in fire and smoke detection. Human factors were given less consideration by the group not
because of its relative unimportance but because the group felt that their expertise did not allow them to
adequately address these issues.
Summary and Conclusions
There was general agreement that current detection systems are based upon inadequate knowledge of
the types of fire signatures for spacecraft materials, the effect of low gravity on fire signatures, and the
transport of fire precursors within a spacecraft. Current systems have been designed using current
knowledge but are generally unverified in a zero-g environment. Because existing systems only respond
to smoke, they are susceptible to dust and the risk of nuisance alarms is significant. Each alarm requires
valuable crew time to respond and evaluate the alarm. Repeated nuisance alarms over time could increase
the crew’s response time. The existing systems also have a poor track record in detecting small transients
that could indicate a fire precursor. There is also no data with which to predict performance during larger
events.
Detection in large cabin volumes and standoffs is a concern because of the sparsely located detectors
within the open cabin volumes. Ventilation systems within a volume will eventually draw air through a
detector but the transport of smoke is not evaluated.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

6

Further improvements in detection will require implementation of hybrid detection systems consisting
of sensors for species and particles. Which species these sensors should look for and what combination of
sensors should be placed in what locations will have to be determined by future tests. Finally, there are
ignition sources other than electrical sources that must receive consideration. Spontaneous ignition is a
potential risk and detection in waste systems may not be adequate.
Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
Moderators:

Professor James T’ien, Case Western Reserve University
Dr. Dennis E. Griffin, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center

This working group consisted of 24 participants (see List of Attendees). The group began by
identifying outstanding issues related to fire prevention and material flammability. They focused
primarily on issues related to ISS and Shuttle systems because these systems are well-defined with respect
to materials used, testing procedures, etc. The issues identified by the group are as follows:
1. Fire scenarios for ISS/Shuttle
2. Testing/screening methods
3. Development of new materials
4. Flammability at elevated oxygen levels (>30%)
5. ISRU processes and storage
Within each of these issues, the group recommended research areas and identified the highest priority
research that should be conducted. Desired outcomes from the research were also identified. The
information for each of the issues will be discussed in the following sections.
Issue 1: Fire Scenarios for ISS/Shuttle
The discussion centered on the most likely ignition mechanisms for manned spacecraft compartment
fires. The following is a list of potential fire sources and scenarios in manned spacecraft for which the
group felt there was a need for investigation. Particularly, they were concerned about determining the
potential for and mitigation of fires from each of these sources. They are listed below in no particular
order of priority:
1. Pressurized gaseous oxygen systems
High pressure oxygen systems (up to 6000 psia) exist that are subject to numerous ignition
mechanisms, including “flow friction,” compression heating, particle impact,
contamination/kindling chain reactions, mechanical impact, friction, etc.
2. Solid Fuel Oxygen Generator (SFOG)
SFOG units have been responsible for two recorded fire events on Mir.
3. Overheating of electrical cable
Overheating of electrical cables and components (pyrolysis events) have been reasonably
common during the manned space program. On average, such an event occurs once every ten
missions.
4. Fire events caused by electrical short circuits
Short circuits have been responsible for the Apollo 204 and Apollo 13 fires. Also, does foreign
object debris from a short circuit represent a fire hazard.
5. Effect of work-arounds/mods
The effect of work-arounds or other modifications that can occur especially in long duration
mission should be evaluated. Can these significantly alter the potential for fire?

NASA/CP—2003-212103

7

6. Aging electrical wire
Wear-induced failures in aging electrical systems can be a problem. There have been some
occurrences of this recently in the Shuttle Obiter and SRB.
7. Auto-ignition of waste storage
It is unknown whether waste might be susceptible to autoignition in low-gravity and, if so, under
what conditions can this occur.
The working group noted that other possibilities exist that have not been considered here including fire
and ignition hazards associated with propulsion systems, pyrotechnics, fuels cells and electrolysis
systems, etc. One must be careful to not limit consideration of all possibilities when designing fire
detection and suppression systems and experiments.
Of these potential fire scenarios, the highest research priority was to investigate ignition mechanisms
and flammability for pressurized oxygen systems.
The outcome of research in the area of fire scenarios should lead to improvements in understanding
and aid in mitigation of potential fire scenarios. This would occur through additional crew training on
awareness and considerations for fire safety. The group also recommended that researchers take
advantage of lessons learned from AWIGG (Aircraft Wiring and Inert Gas Generator) working group.
Issue 2: Testing/Screening Methods
The following is a list of recommendations for research that would improve and/or augment existing
materials flammability screening methods:
1. Augment existing go/no go criteria with a quantitative test method which provides ranking or
indication of flammability margin, e.g. LOI or radiation panel. This would provide more
information to the standard Test 1 acceptance criteria to aid in more informed materials selections.
2. More understanding on relationship between 1-g test methods to microgravity performance. Due
to the limited amount of microgravity data, this would allow for a better understanding of more
appropriate material selection decisions.
3. Need to understand the implications of non-flaming and smoldering combustion in microgravity
with respect to ISS engineering materials. Current NASA standard flammability test techniques
do not take smoldering combustion into account so this data would fill this apparent gap.
4. There is a need for additional microgravity data on the effects of oxygen and flow on ignition,
combustion and flame propagation for real engineering materials. This data is required to enable
rational design analysis
5. Very little data is available on combustion behavior in partial gravity yet this information is
required for future exploratory missions. There is a need to obtain such data, or possibly
appropriate theoretical predictions or scaling analysis, from microgravity data.
6. A better understanding of the relationship between flame spread across thermally thick and thin
materials must be established. Since the ability to obtain data using thermally thin samples is
much better than for thermally-thick samples, a method or scaling relationship to accurately
extrapolate thin data to more realistic thick spacecraft engineering materials would be very
desirable.
7. There is a definite need for long duration microgravity experimental data. A facility to carry out
long duration partial and microgravity combustion experiment is essential.
8. Currently NASA’s materials selection criteria are based on flammability and not on the resulting
toxicity of the combustion event. Research is needed to understand the toxicity and fire hazards
associated with the pyrolysis of combustion products and production of aerosols. If necessary,
this information should be factored into materials selection criteria, pre-fire events and post-fire
response. (Need: Moderate)
Of these research areas, all were considered to be high priority except for item number 8.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

8

Issue 3: New Materials Need to be Studied
The members of the working group recognized that future spacecraft were likely to be composed of
different materials than those used in past and current spacecraft. Research topics within this area dealt
with the need for additional or improved flammability investigations for these materials.
1. Flammability of Inflatable Structures (Moderate)
Inflatable structures may be used for interplanetary transportation system structures,
e.g. TransHab-type concepts, due to launch vehicle space constraints. Information on
flammability of these materials is required.
2. Non-Flammable Foam Packing Material (High)
Currently, flammable foam materials are widely used for ISS stowage and packaging.
A nonflammable replacement would greatly benefit a short-term need.
3. Flame-Retardant Clothing (Moderate)
More comfortable flame retardant fabric or fabric treatments for crew clothing is required,
especially during long term missions. Current cotton clothing is, of course, highly flammable
and not suitable for fire fighting.
4. Alternative wire insulation (High)
An insulation material with the good properties (lightweight, flexible, high cut-through
resistance) of polyimide and fluorocarbon constructions and none of the bad properties (poor tear
resistance, cold flow, stiff) is needed.
5. Advanced composites (Moderate)
Advanced composites are becoming more common and are extensively used in ISS for rack
structures and are even being considered for oxygen tanks. In consideration of the potential for
smoldering combustion, their inherent flammability in enriched oxygen, and because of the
obvious advantages they offer in terms of weight and strength, these materials merit further
flammability investigations for spacecraft applications.
The working group emphasized that we may need to take advantage of FAA established data for
advanced materials.
Issue 4: New Research Considerations
1. Since future interplanetary missions will be weight limited, gaseous N2 may become a limited
resource, hence microgravity experiments at oxygen concentrations greater than 30% should be
considered.
Issue 5: ISRU processes and storage
This discussion dealt with in-situ high temperature/high pressure production processes that are being
investigated to utilize lunar and planetary resources for providing life support fuel resources (e.g. oxygen,
methane, CO, etc.)
1. Education and training of researchers
People doing this research may have not considered the possibilities of fire or explosion in the
experimentation. Training and recognition of potential hazards is available in courses offered by
ASTM, etc. (also see item #2 below)
2. Understanding of hazards analysis techniques
3. Improve understanding of flow friction as an ignition source
Flow friction involves a fluid leaking through a small orifice and has been thought to be the cause
of several recent oxygen system fires. However, this ignition mechanism is not well understood.
(Refer to Issue 1 research recommendations)

NASA/CP—2003-212103

9

4. Supplement particle impact database
The data base for particle impact ignition information is very limited in terms of particulate sizes,
types, velocities and temperatures. (Refer to Issue 1 research recommendations)
Issue 6: Risk assessment
This discussion involved the aspect of analyses for preventing fires and quantifying fire risk.
1. Probabilistic Risk Assessments
Gain a better understanding of available probabilistic risk assessment and simulation tools.
2. Aircraft, Submarine, and Ship Analogies
Understand what is done in the submarine industry.
3. Determine implications of limited microgravity data sets
What are the confidence level considerations for repeatability of microgravity data/experiments?
What are the implications when considering design of experiments (DOE) and the usefulness of
limited sets of data?
Fire and Post-Fire Response
Moderators:

Dr. Robert Friedman, NASA Glenn Research Center (retired)
Mr. J. Michael Bennett, Wright-Patterson AFB

This working group had 21 participants representing the government, various research organizations,
and academia (see List of Attendees). The working sessions began with presentations on current research
covering spacecraft fire response. Following these presentations, there was a general discussion about
overall research needs in spacecraft fire safety and how many of these needs impacted topics in fire and
post-fire response. The group then agreed to include topics that provided initial conditions for a fire
response in their scope of research.
Current Technology Issues
First, the working group identified fundamental issues that can benefit greatly from new or increased
information. This lack of knowledge hinders the ability of the fire-protection community to improve fireprotection capabilities. Examples of these basic needs include knowledge, measurements, predictions or
correlations of the following:
1. Rate of fire spread anticipated in space platforms under realistic fire scenarios
2. Rate of extinguishing agent transport from the reservoirs to the site of the fire, and the
phenomena that influence it
3. Actual effectiveness and limits of performance of the existing on-board carbon dioxide fire
extinguishing systems
4. Performance and capabilities of the foam fire extinguishing systems currently employed by the
Russians in space
5. Current NASA policy that may permit or preclude consideration of alternative fire extinguishing
agents to carbon dioxide
6. Types of combustion by-products emitted by the fires and the extinguishing agents applied to
them in spacecraft
7. Fundamental understanding of the influence of low gravity (reduced gravity and microgravity)
on the extinguishment process and
8. Knowledge of the escape and evacuation mechanisms available to crew members

NASA/CP—2003-212103

10

Research Areas
Next, the team discussed the major research areas and enabling technologies that can address the
identified key issues. These discussions defined the areas of study for improvement and advancement of
spacecraft fire and post-fire response techniques. The research is presented in the following list.
1. Experimental Determination of Flow in Compartments
The precise definition and characterization of the flow field in compartments where fires may
occur, or where agent or by-products may flow, is of primary and fundamental concern for the
fire-characterization process. For the ISS, the compartments are defined, in terms of increasing
size, as the rack, module, and inter-module. Experimental data of the flow fields must be obtained
in the appropriate low-gravity environment. Both scalar velocity and momentum data of the flows
must be obtained. This activity should incorporate general flow fields in major zones and also
local point sources of airflow variance due to the presence of inlet or outlet ducts, exhausts, etc.
2. CFD Representation of Flow in Compartments
This activity is a corollary to activity #1, which constructs a computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) model to correspond to the experimental model being developed. This numerical model
will be a tool of great assistance in later characterizing the fire-establishment and -propagation
process. These two activities should interact with and jointly refine each other.
3. Digital Compartment Configuration Documentation
This effort entails the collection and development of engineering data on spacecraft
compartment configurations, dimensions and components. These will be used as tools in defining
fire-zone locations, conditions and geometries. The operating conditions, fuel sources and states
(solid, liquid, gas), and other features pertinent to fire-protection analysis will be documented.
Such data ideally are to be stored in digital formats for use in computer codes and models.
4

Proposal of Fire Scenarios
The goal of this activity is to identify likely fire locations, size, and growth or spread
phenomena on-board spacecraft of interest. Such fire designations should incorporate pertinent
aspects of smoldering or flaming conditions, as applicable. The presence or lack of sooting should
also be noted and represented. This activity should also support the initiation of an updated faulttree analysis (of issues related to fire safety) for platforms such as the International Space Station.

5. Characterization of Fire Event
Modeling specifically for a fire event starts with the experimental and numerical verification
of the fire conditions. This will establish the phenomena of fire growth and spread in low-gravity
conditions on a realistic scale. (Note the distinction between fire growth, a safety issue, and flame
growth, a research and possibly safety issue.)
6. Development of Fire-Response Concepts
This activity starts with a review and assessment of the current fire-response systems to
establish baseline protection. This leads to the proposal and development of new technologies to
mitigate fire events. The innovative approaches will be based on the operating experience in
space (as available) and the application of new data. The broad range of opportunities covers both
passive and active fire mitigation. Passive responses are those of fire isolation, containment,
power and flow shutdown, and the like. Active responses are those of conventional
extinguishment-agent discharge and compartment venting. Partial evacuation followed by agent
discharge is suggested as a very efficient method of combating a difficult fire, a technique worthy
of further consideration.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

11

7. Agent Transport in Low Gravity
An effective means of agent delivery in low gravity has never been determined. Experimental
and numerical studies can characterize the transport phenomena from the discharge outlets to the
fire site. The results can hold promise for improved specifications for extinguishing applications,
covering gaseous and mixed phase agents.
8. Fire-Related Emissions
Emissions and their toxic effects are relevant to the assessment of fire response. By-products
from the fire event can include not only pyrolysis and combustion products, but also those from
suppressant decomposition.
9. Extinguishing Agent Performance in Low Gravity
There is almost a complete lack of information on the performance of extinguishing agents in
microgravity and other reduced gravity environments. Performance includes the efficiency
(quantity required) of extinguishment, the sustaining power (time of application), and other
criteria. Research must cover a range of current and potential future agents, including gases,
liquids, powders, and mixed phases.
10. Agent Distribution
In addition to the determination of extinguishing agent performance, necessary research must
include the investigation and assessment of the spatial distribution of agents. These data will
serve to optimize flow rates, predict the thermodynamic state of the agent, and establish the range
of agent application. The scope of this research must include fixed and portable extinguishing
systems, centralized and distributed systems, local and general applications, and streaming and
flooding discharge.
11. Agent/Fire Interaction
This necessary research covers the behavior of the suppressant entering and within the
combustion zone, raising the issue of the determination of such transport issues as diffusion. It is
almost certain that gravity will affect this interaction, and models and verifying experiments are
necessary for low-gravity predictions.
12. Post-Fire Sampling and Characterization
Existing rules include criteria for determining that a fire is “out” for discontinuing fire
response and reentry into the affected zone. These regulations are based on ground experience
exclusively. Low-gravity research is essential for the definition of the end of a fire, to assure safe
entry, conserve extinguishing agent, and prevent re-ignition. Predictions from research should
establish improved atmospheric sampling techniques and diagnostics for these criteria.
13. Obscuration Mitigation
Both flaming and smoldering fire may generate smoke, quickly filling the confined volume
of a spacecraft. Smoke may be both a hazard and a nuisance, but the major concern is the
obscuration, impeding entry, control, or escape. Predictive data are important, covering the
special environments of the low-gravity spacecraft. Research can lead to mitigating technology,
including crew equipment to accommodate the obscured environment (smoke hoods, for
example).
As evidenced by the above list, fire response requires input from the topics areas addressed by the
other two working groups. For example, to properly respond to a fire, you have to first know what is
burning (material flammability) and how long it has been burning (material flammability, time between
initiation and detection). This implies knowing the specifics about material configuration, locations of

NASA/CP—2003-212103

12

ignition sources, flow conditions, etc. The working group decided that this information is essential to
determining a proper fire response and should be included in their analysis as part of determining the
initial conditions to any fire response. Because of the short time allotted for this analysis, the working
group did not further combine or prioritize their thirteen research topics. However, these topics are not
unrelated and can be categorized into three general areas as follows:
Specifications of the Conditions Prior to the Response
To assess a fire response strategy, information about the expected type, size, and location of the fire is
required. The research topics that address this general theme are:
1. Digital Compartment Configuration Documentation
2. Evaluation of Potential Fire Locations and Scenarios
3. Experimental Determination of Flow in Compartments
4. CFD Representation of Flow in Compartments
5. Characterization of Fire Events
The computational and experimental determination of flow in a compartment is required to
understand the initial conditions of the flow field where a fire may occur and the regions that would be
affected by the discharge of a suppressant. Also, details of the flow field are required to determine the rate
of flame spread and the path of smoke transport. From this, the time from fire initiation to detection can
be estimated. Knowing the type of fire, the possible ignition source, flame spread rate, and time to
detection, an estimate of the size of the fire what the automated and crew response procedures begin can
be obtained.
Evaluation of Fire Suppressants
Once a fire has been detected and an alarm has sounded, the automated and/or crew fire response
begins. There are different types of responses and the ability to determine their relative effectiveness for
various fire scenarios is an important step in minimizing equipment damage and reducing the amount of
clean-up required. The research areas that address this theme are listed below:
1. Agent Transport in Low Gravity
2. Extinguishing Agent Performance in Low Gravity
–Agent/Fire Interaction
3. Gaseous and Particulate Emissions from Fires and Suppressants
Effectiveness of Fire Response Strategies
Knowing the effectiveness and behavior of individual suppressant agents, various response strategies
and be proposed and evaluated. The research areas required for this theme include:
1. Development of Fire-Response Concepts
–Obscuration Mitigation
2. Agent Distribution Requirements and Behavior
3. Post-Fire Sampling and Characterization
Summary and Conclusions
Even though the working group did not specifically prioritize the research topics, the categories listed
above imply a sequence of research areas required for the development of effective fire response
strategies for manned spacecraft. An area that was repeatedly emphasized by the working group during its
discussions was that an appropriate response could be defined only as well as the “initial conditions” of
the fire were known. This includes knowing the material being burned, the location and size of the fire,
and the ambient conditions (O2 concentration and velocity, for example). Some of this is addressed by
NASA/CP—2003-212103

13

research identified by the other two working groups. The areas that are not addressed, such as knowing
the ambient conditions when a fire starts constitute high-priority research areas specific to fire response.

Spacecraft Fire Safety Research Plan
Upon obtaining the above lists and prioritizations from experts in various aspects of fire safety, it is
important to meld the recommendations into a coherent research plan. As a result of this input, a research
roadmap for spacecraft fire safety was prepared and is shown in Table 2. The tasks are divided into the
three general areas mirroring the focus of the working groups, i.e., fire prevention and material
flammability, smoke and fire detection, and fire suppression. Work items and overall objectives were
identified. While the roadmap shows research efforts over a ten-year period, the first tasks in each area
are of the highest priority and work in these areas should be initiated immediately. Research in many of
these areas has, in fact, begun since the workshop and the findings of these studies will be presented in
future reports and workshops. Continuing research efforts will build on this initial work.
Many of the research areas identified in Table 2 are drawn directly from the recommendations and
research priorities identified by the working groups during the workshop. Others have been refined from
these recommendations based on results from on-going research. Of course, these research areas and
topics will continue to evolve as plans are implemented and results are obtained to ensure that the most
relevant and critical areas are continuously addressed.
Table 2. Spacecraft Fire Safety Research Roadmap
Technical Area

Time Frame
2004 - 2007

2001 - 2004

- Evaluate the potential for and behavior of deep seated fires in non-1g
environments
- Determine potential for autoignition and explosion of high-P gaseous oxygen
Flammability of
Practical Materials

- Determine flammability and flame

- Determine limiting O2 and flow for
flame propagation on practical
materials in µg and partial-g
- Determine the effects of sub-limit insitu propellant concentrations in
standard and enriched O2
atmospheres on practical material
flammability

spread of plastic and composite
materials in partial-g for variations in
flow and imposed heat flux
- Improved test methods to rank
materials

Fire Signatures and
Detection

Fire Suppression
and Post-Fire
Response

- Develop component-level sensors
for fire detection
- Define and validate method to
establish pre-fire and fire signatures of
practical materials in 1g

- Develop and demonstrate integrated
sensor (chemical/smoke)
- Establish pre-fire and fire signatures
of practical materials in low g

- Evaluate in-situ fire extinguishants
- Develop model of flame growth and stability in practical configurations to
extend applicability of data base and to guide design of new systems
- Integrate understanding of
extinguishment strategy and flame
behavior in non-1g environments
through analysis and modeling
- Fundamental and system-level tradeoff studies of flame-suppression
techniques

NASA/CP—2003-212103

14

- Analyze and test physical dispersion
of suppressant and techniques for
extinguishment
- Test and validate flame suppression
methods in enriched O2 and exotic
atmospheres

2007 - 2010

Flammability
measurements and
correlation from
normal-g to µg; new
validated test
methods for
material ranking

Data base for fire
signatures and
demonstration of
new detection
systems

Experimental
validation of fire
suppressant
performance,
analysis and models
of fire suppressant
strategies in µg and
partial-g

References
1. Margle, Janice M.: Spacecraft Fire Safety. NASA CP−2476, 1987.
2. Friedman, Robert; and Sacksteder, Kurt R.: Science and Technology Issues in Spacecraft Fire Safety.
NASA TM−88933 (AIAA Paper 87−0467), 1987.
3. Apostolakis, G.E., Catton, I., Paulor, T., and Paxton, K.: Findings of a Review of Spacecraft Fire
Safety Needs. NASA CR−189181, 1992.
4. Singh, Bhim S.: Workshop on Research for Space Exploration: Physical Sciences and Process
Technology. NASA/CP1998-207431, 1998.
http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/GLTRS/browse.pl?1998/CP-1998-207431.html
Accessed Jan. 7, 2003.
5. Friedman, Robert; and Urban, David L.: Progress in Fire Detection and Suppression Technology for
Future Space Missions. NASA/TM2000-210337 (AIAA Paper 2000−5251), 2000.
http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/GLTRS/browse.pl?2000/TM-2000-210337.html
Accessed Jan. 7, 2003.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

15

Appendix—Plenary Presentations
Five presentations were delivered during the opening session of the workshop and are included in this
appendix. The titles of the presentations and the speakers were as follows:
1. Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space
Speaker: Dr. Gary A. Ruff, Spacecraft Fire Safety Project Scientist,
NASA Glenn Research Center
2. Spacecraft Fire Safety: A Human Space Flight Program Perspective
Speaker: Dr. Michael D. Pedley, ISS Materials and Process Manager,
NASA Johnson Space Center
3. Control of Materials Flammability Hazards
Speaker: Dr. Dennis E. Griffin, Chemistry Group Leader, Materials, Processes, and
Manufacturing Department, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
4. Overview of ISS U.S. Fire Detection and Suppression System
Speaker: Alana Whitaker, ISS ECLS Subsystem Manager, Fire Detection and Suppression
Systems, NASA Johnson Space Center
5. An Introduction to Mars ISPP Technologies
Speaker: Dr. Dale E. Lueck, Systems Engineering and Analysis Branch, Spaceport Engineering
and Technology, NASA Kennedy Space Center

NASA/CP—2003-212103

17

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space
Dr. Gary A. Ruff
Spacecraft Fire Safety Project Scientist
NASA Glenn Research Center

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

Workshop on

Research Needs in Fire Safety
for the

Human Exploration and Utilization
of Space
Hosted by

NASA John H. Glenn Research Center
and the

National Center for Microgravity Research in Fluids and Combustion
Sheraton Airport Hotel
Cleveland, Ohio
June 25 - 26, 2001

Background
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Last Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop was held August 20-21, 1986

NASA/CP—2003-212103

19

Background
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Last Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop was held August 20-21, 1986
– Challenger accident 8 months earlier
– Space Station designs underway

•

107 people, 5 break-out forums
–
–
–
–
–

•

Fire detection and ignition
Fire extinguishment
Human responses to combustion products and inert atmospheres
Spacecraft materials and configurations
Selection of spacecraft atmospheres

Objectives
– Review current knowledge in fire safety
– Assess the needs relevant to spacecraft

•

Microgravity combustion research conducted since 1986 has impacted
fire safety practices on STS and ISS

Office of Biological and Physical Research
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

Cross-disciplinary Science and Technology
CrossWorking Groups

NASA/CP—2003-212103

20

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Bioastronautics Initiative - History

In mid-1999, the Space and Life Sciences Directorate at Johnson Space
Center was challenged to develop a new paradigm for NASA human life
sciences
– Space Medicine
– Space Biomedical Research and Countermeasures
– Advanced Human Support Technology

•

A new thrust - Bioastronautics - was formulated with a budget
augmentation request

•

Objective:
– Expanded extramural community participation through the National Space
Biomedical Research Institute
– Initiated the detailed planning and implementation of Bioastronautics
• An Integrated Approach to Ensure Healthy and Safe Human Space Travel
• Assist in the Solution of Earth-based Problems

Bioastronautics Initiative
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Builds upon previous and ongoing work
– A significant amount of fundamental knowledge has been created through ground
and flight research
– Apply this knowledge base to applications and solutions which will provide safer
human operations in space

•

Utilizes new research resources
– ISS/STS research opportunities
– Ground analogs

•

Leverages new and unique capabilities
–
–
–
–

Scientific community to focus on NASA issues
Transfer knowledge to Earth based problems
Cooperate with other Federal Agencies
Develop new technologies
• smart medical systems
• biologically-inspired technologies
• fire protection

NASA/CP—2003-212103

21

NASA Bioastronautics Initiative –
Combustion Science

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Substantially improve spacecraft fire safety within six years
– $1M per year for four years (initial funding level)
– Grant-based through NRAs and directed research

•

Fire safety practices and procedures
– ISS and Shuttle operations
– Prolonged human-crew missions in Earth orbit and beyond
–

Lunar and/or Martian habitats
• In-situ resource utilization
• Propellant manufacture and storage

Workshop Objectives
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•
•
•

Identify research needed for fire safety of STS, ISS and their payloads
Identify fire safety concerns for prolonged human-crew missions in
Earth orbit and beyond
Anticipate research for future Lunar/Martian habitats

Approach
• Plenary session to overview current operations and issues in fire
protection in space
• Working groups to review current research and identify needs in the
areas of
– Fire prevention and material flammability
– Smoke and fire detection
– Fire and post-fire response

NASA/CP—2003-212103

22

Plenary Speakers
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Dennis Griffin
– Group Leader, Chemistry Group
Materials, Processes, and Manufacturing Department
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center

•

Michael D. Pedley
– ISS Materials and Processes Manager
NASA Johnson Space Center

•

Alana A. Whitaker
– ISS Environmental Control and Life Support Systems
Fire Detection and Suppression Department
NASA Johnson Space Center

•

Dale E. Lueck
– Systems Engineering and Analysis Branch
Spaceport Engineering and Technology
NASA Kennedy Space Center

Working Groups
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Fire Prevention and Material Flammability (O’Hare Room)
– James T’ien, Case Western Reserve University
– Dennis Griffin, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center

•

Smoke and Fire Detection (Dulles Room)
– David L. Urban, NASA Glenn Research Center
– Thomas Cleary, National Institute of Standards and Technology

•

Fire and Post-Fire Response (Hartsfield Room)
– Robert Friedman, NASA Glenn Research Center
– J. Michael Bennett, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base

•

Sessions will begin with introductions and short presentations of
current research
–
–
–
–

Begin discussions of mission-driven fire protection systems within these areas
Recognize current knowledge and identify unknowns
Define research needed to fill gaps
Prioritize by short and long term, if applicable

NASA/CP—2003-212103

23

Schedule
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

Monday, June 25
8:00 AM

8:30 AM

9:00 A M

9:30 A M

W elcom e

M aterials Testing
and Certification
G riffin

N ASA MSFC

Spacecraft Fire
Safety: A H um an
Sp ace Flight
P ro gram
Perspective
Pedley
N AS A JS C

ISS Fire
Protection and
the E CLS S
System
W hitaker
N AS A JS C

1:30 PM

3:30 P M

4:00 P M

11:00 A M

M oderato rs:
U rban, C leary
Presentations:
Urban, Hunter,
Young

S m o ke and
Fire D etection
(D ulles Room )

Fire
and Post-Fire
Respo nse
(Hartsfield Room )

12:00 PM

M oderato rs:
T'ien, G riffin
Presentations:
Torero,
Fernandez-P ello
O lson

W orking
Session

Lunch (Lambert Room)

Fire Prevention
and
M aterial
Flam m ab ility
(O'H are Room )

O strach

M oderato rs:
F riedm an, Benn ett
Presentations:
Ross, Takahashi,
Abbud-Madrid

Break
(Grand
B allroom )

6:00 P M

10:15 AM

10:45 AM

In-S itu
Propellant
M an ufacture
and Storage
Lueck
N ASA K SC

Ch arg e to
W o rking
G ro ups
Ruff

6:30 P M

W o rking
Session

W orking
Session

W orking
Session

W o rking
Session

Dinner (Lambert Room)

Ruff,
Registration/
C ontinental
Breakfast
(G rand B allroom )

Plenary
(G rand Ballroom )

10:00 AM

Cash Bar (Lambert Room)

7:00 AM

Break (Grand Ballroom)

Event

W o rking
Session

Schedule

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

Tuesday, June 26
8:00 AM

Smoke and
Fire Detection
(Dulles Room)

Fire
and Post-Fire
Response
(Hartsfield Room)

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Continental Breakfast (Grand Ballroom)

Fire Prevention
and
Material
Flammability
(O'Hare Room)

9:45 AM

Fire Prevention
and Materials
Summary

Plenary
(Grand Ballroom)

9:00 AM

Smoke and
Fire Detection
Summary

Working
Session
Wrap-up

10:30 AM

Working
Session
Wrap-up

Working
Session
Wrap-up

24

10:45 AM

11:30 AM

Fire and
Post-Fire
Summary

Closing
Ruff

11:45 AM
Lunch/Completion of Written Summaries (Working Group Leaders)
(Lounge)

7:00 AM

Break ( Grand Ballroom)

Event

Summary Presentations

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

General Topic
• Current level of understanding
• Desired improvement or level of knowledge required
– If possible,
– Near-term
– Long-term

•

Recommendations for research within this topic

•

Other Considerations
–
–
–
–

Enabling technologies
Impact on current procedures or future designs
Technology transfer/technology teaming opportunities
Who is the User?
• Desired format

Written Report

National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center

•

Introduction
– Conduct of the group
– Decision/discussion process

•

Current Technology Issues
– Issue 1
• Knowns and unknowns

– Issue 2

•

Research Areas
– Major Areas
• Near-term
• Mid-term

– Enabling technologies
– Technology teaming possibilities
– Format of information desired by user

NASA/CP—2003-212103

25

Spacecraft Fire Safety: A Human Space Flight Program Perspective
Dr. Michael D. Pedley
ISS Materials and Process Manager
NASA Johnson Space Center

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

SPACECRAFT FIRE SAFETY
A HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT PROGRAM
PERSPECTIVE

Michael D. Pedley
ISS Materials and Processes Manager
NASA Johnson Space Center

Page 1 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

TYPICAL MANNED SPACECRAFT MATERIALS

Page 2 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

27

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

TYPICAL MANNED SPACECRAFT MATERIALS

Page 3 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

TYPICAL MANNED SPACECRAFT MATERIALS

Page 4 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

28

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

TYPICAL FLAMMABLE HARDWARE PROTECTION

Page 5 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

MATERIALS FLAMMABILITY
• Current ground-based testing conservative but not intolerably restrictive for
Shuttle/ISS environments – adequate supply of nonflammable materials for
vehicle design to 30% oxygen environment
• Long-term need to quantify “conservative”
o Relax ISS flammability requirements for payloads, clothing, portable
equipment accordingly
o Future manned space exploration missions extremely weight limited – very
desirable to minimize use of nitrogen as consumable by returning to
Apollo/Skylab oxygen concentrations

Page 6 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

29

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

FIRE RETARDANTS
• Need a good and easy fire retardant treatment for fabrics (cotton, paper,
synthetics)
o No significant changes in weight/feel of material,
o Impervious to washing, dry cleaning
o Odorless
• Have to compete with current practice of allowing 100% cotton outer clothing
(flammable)
o Commercially available fire retardants tried with little enthusiasm from crew
– stiff, dry-clean only, slight odor

Page 7 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

NONFLAMMABLE FOAM CUSHION MATERIAL
• No good nonflammable foam cushion material
o Current choices are Pyrell fire-retardant polyurethane (flammable and life-limited)
and Minicell polyethylene foam (more flammable but not life-limited)
o Both weigh about 2 lb/cu. ft. and are very inexpensive
• Desired cushion material would have following properties
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Nonflammable to at least 30% oxygen
Lightweight – preferably appreciably less than 2 lb/cu. ft.
Not life-limited – life 30 years +
Minimal compression set
High resilience, tear resistance
Negligible particulate formation
Open cell for vacuum compatibility
Very inexpensive
Easy to cut into complex shapes

Page 8 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

30

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

NONFLAMMABLE FOAM CUSHION MATERIAL
-- EXISTING CANDIDATES
• Polyimide Foams (Solimide)
o Very lightweight (0.5 lb/cu. ft.), nonflammable in 30% oxygen, not life-limited,
open cell
o Very poor compression set, significant particulate generation, poor “feel”
o Difficult to cut without generating considerable particulate
o Very expensive
• Melamine Foams
o Very lightweight (0.5 lb/cu. ft.), nonflammable in 30% oxygen, not life-limited,
open cell, reasonable compression set
o Minimal particulate generation but appreciable fine dust
o Poor resilience, very poor tear resistance
o Very difficult to cut complex shapes or thin slices
o Very inexpensive
• Silicone Foams
o Expensive, very heavy (at least 6 lb/cu. ft. for adequate resilience)
Page 9 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

ELECTRICAL WIRE AND CABLE
• Critical component from fire safety standpoint, because electrical power is only really
credible ignition source (excepting solid-fuel oxygen generators)
• Key features
o
o
o
o

Nonflammable to 40% oxygen, resists arc-tracking
High resistance to mechanical damage (abrasion, nicks, cuts)
High flexibility
Lightweight and capable of operating at high temperatures (at least 200 ºC)

• No perfect construction
o Teflon is heavy and has poor damage resistance
o Kapton is stiff, has very poor arc-tracking resistance, is easily damaged by
nicks, and may degrade in humid environments
o Tefzel is flammable in enriched oxygen, has limited life above 150 ºC and modest
damage resistance
o Teflon-polyimide hybrids currently best compromise for most applications but
some aspects inferior to Kapton and others inferior to Teflon
Page 10 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

31

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

RUSSIAN SOLID-FUEL OXYGEN GENERATOR
(SFOG)

Page 11 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

GOX IGNITION MECHANISMS
• Two important areas of limited understanding with respect to materials ignition
and combustion in oxygen systems
• In recent years, several oxygen system fires have been attributed to a
phenomenon christened (possibly erroneously) as “flow friction”
o Occurs only at high pressures (> 2500 psia)
o Occurs in pressurized static systems (all other known ignition
mechanisms are tied to motion – rapid pressurization, particle impact,
friction
o Appears to result from leakage through a seal
o Ignition mechanism not understood, so cannot be controlled by
design/materials selection
• Limited studies of particle impact ignition have shown that high flow velocities
are required and that metallic particles are probably worse than nonmetals –
but we don’t know in any detail:
o Velocity effects for different particulate contaminants
o Effects of particle size and quantity
o Effectiveness of filters as protection (as functions of filter size and filter
material)
o True hazards from gas streams exiting valve seats/orifices at sonic velocity
Page 12 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

32

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

FIRE DETECTION
• Need capability to distinguish between pyrolysis event and true self-supporting
combustion
o Pyrolysis events relatively commonplace and inevitable (electrical shorts,
component failures, arcing/arc tracking)
o No true fires on orbit, excepting SFOG, combustion experiments
• Needs to have high reliability, no false positives
• Solve conundrum of
o Air flow needed for to transport smoke, combustion products to traditional
sensors for fire detection
o Air flow worst thing for microgravity fires

Page 13 of 14

Michael D. Pedley/EM2
Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space

FIRE SUPPRESSION
• Fire suppression capability always for backup only, but needs to be effective
backup
• Issues with Halon-type extinguishers include:
o ECLSS compatibility
o Extinguishant toxicity
o Effectiveness at elevated oxygen concentrations
o Environmental
• Issues with carbon dioxide (ISS baseline) include:
o Application (where is base of flame?)
o Induced forced convection (will carbon dioxide application extinguish a
microgravity fire or stir it up?)
o Mixing (obtaining adequate concentrations in racks)
• Issues with water-based suppressants (includes Russian segment ISS
baseline) include:
o Compatibility with electrical systems
o Clean up
o Use in racks (application to fire source, clean-up)
Page 14 of 14

NASA/CP—2003-212103

33

Michael D. Pedley/NASA JSC
June 2001

Control of Materials Flammability Hazards
Dr. Dennis E. Griffin
Chemistry Group Leader
Materials, Processes, and Manufacturing Department
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

Control of Materials Flammability
Hazards
Dennis E. Griffin
Chemistry Group Leader
NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center
Materials, Processes, and Manufacturing Department

June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin

1

Control of Materials
Flammability Hazards

Fire is one of many potentially catastrophic hazards associated with
materials used in the operation of manned spacecraft
Appropriate materials selection and control of flammable materials is an
important element of NASA’s approach to fire control
Major lesson learned from the Apollo 204 fire in 1966 was ignition
sources can be minimized but never completely eliminated
Spacecraft fire control is based on minimizing potential ignition sources
and “eliminating materials that can propagate fire”
– This means controlling quantity and configuration of flammable materials to
eliminate potential fire propagation paths and ensure any fire would be
small, localized, isolated and would self-extinguish without harm to the crew

•

Fire extinguishers are always provided on manned spacecraft but are
not considered as part of the fire control process
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

35

Dennis Griffin

2

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

Control of Materials
Flammability Hazards
(continued)

•

Ground-based flammability testing is conservative but has not proven to
be unusually restrictive for materials in manned spacecraft environments

•

Many solutions have been developed for controlling the configuration of
flammable materials and materials in commercial “off-the-shelf” (COTS)
hardware so that they can be used safely in manned spacecraft
NSTS 22648, “Flammability Configuration Analysis for Spacecraft
Applications,” describes these design solutions so customers can design
safe and cost-effective flight hardware
Current processes for controlling materials flammability hazards have
successfully assured space flight materials and systems do not constitute
an uncontrolled fire hazard
Materials control processes include requirements, guidelines, testing,
data bases, data requirement submittals, design analyses, deviation
evaluation, hazard mitigation, verification, approval and certification

– Adequate sources of nonflammable materials for vehicle design

•
•
•

June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

•

•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin

3

Flammability
Requirements

All flight hardware used in NASA manned space programs must comply with
the flammability requirements of NASA-STD-6001, “Flammability, Odor,
Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for
Materials in Environments That Support Combustion”
Establishes NASA program requirements for evaluation, testing and
selection of materials to preclude unsafe conditions related to flammability in
the following environments:
– Habitable flight compartments (internal)
– Locations outside habitable areas (external)
– Ground Support Equipment (GSE) and specified test facilities
– Vented and sealed containers
– Liquid and gaseous oxygen (LOX/GOX)
– Breathing gases
NASA-STD-6001 describes required flammability tests and requires a
system flammability evaluation for materials that fail these tests
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

36

Dennis Griffin

4

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

NASA-STD-6001 contains several materials flammability and ignition tests:
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Test 1 - Upward Flame Propagation (fundamental test for solid materials)
Test 2 - Heat and Visible Smoke Release Rates (cone calorimeter)
Test 3 - Flash Point of Liquids (ASTM D 93 Pensky-Martens closed tester)
Test 5 - Electrical Connector Potting & Conformal Coating Flammability (deleted)
Test 4 - Electrical Wire Insulation Flammability (15o inclined @ 125oC/ overload)
Test 8 - Flammability Test for Materials in Vented or Sealed Containers
Test 10 - Simulated Panel or Major Assembly Flammability (configuration Test 1)
Test 11 - Simulated Crew Bay Configuration Flammability Verification (deleted)
Test 13 - Mechanical Impact for Materials in Ambient/Pressurized LOX/GOX
Test 14 - Pressurized Gaseous Oxygen (GOX) Pneumatic Impact for Nonmetals
Test 17 - Upward Flammability of Materials in GOX (only for pressurized O2 sys.)
Test 18 - Arc Tracking (for electrical wire insulation - not true flammability test)
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Flammability
Requirements
(continued)

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin

5

Flammability
Requirements and System
Evaluations

Nonflammable – a material that self-extinguishes within 6” when ignited and
does not propagate a flame by transfer of burning debris (for at least 3
standard sized samples)
Standard chemical ignition source – energy 750 + 50 cal., temperature 2000
+ 160oF, burning duration 25 + 5 sec., flame height 2.5 + 0.25”
“Worst-case” anticipated use environment (most hazardous pressure,
temperature, material thickness, and fluid exposure conditions) must be
used in the testing and evaluation process
Materials shown to meet the acceptance criteria of the required test(s) are
acceptable for further consideration in design
Systems containing materials that have not been tested or do not meet the
criteria of the required test(s) must be verified acceptable in the use
configuration by analysis or testing
Fundamental requirements is for overall system to be safe from a
flammability standpoint
Test methods exist to provide data needed to support systems evaluation
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

37

Dennis Griffin

6

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•

Flammability
Requirements and System
Evaluations (continued)

An acceptable alternative to flammability testing is to assume material is
flammable and demonstrate by analysis that the material configuration
cannot propagate fire (e.g. for COTS hardware and electronic equipment)
These requirements are implemented through various NASA program and
Materials and Processes (M&P) requirements documents:
– JSC SE-R-0006/MSFC-STD-506, General M&P Standard (Shuttle)
– SSP 30233, Space Station Requirements for M&P (ISS)
– NSTS 1700.7, Safety Policy & Requirements for Payloads Using the Space
Transportation System and (same requirements in the) ISS Addendum

•

•

NSTS 1700.7 tailors the NASA-STD-6001 requirements by exempting
payload materials used in small quantities (less than 0.1 lb. or 10 square
inches in manned crew environments and less than 1 lb. and/or 12 linear
inches for external materials)
Hardware containing materials that do not meet flammability requirements
require Board approval with acceptance rationale and system evaluation
documented in Materials Usage Agreements (MUAs) or Hazard Reports
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin

7

System Evaluations and
Environments

Systems flammability evaluations or oxygen hazards analyses are required
consistent with the hazards assessment guidelines and requirement of:
– NSTS 22648, Flammability Configuration Analysis for Spacecraft Applications
– NASA TM 104823, Guide for Oxygen Hazards Analyses on Comp. and Systems
– NSS 1740.15, Standard for Oxygen and Oxygen Systems, Guidelines for Design

•
•
•
•
•

Standard rationale codes (for Class III MUAs) are available for the most
common acceptable configurations containing flammable materials
Approval of hazard assessments documented in M&P Certification
Materials flammability depends strongly on the oxygen concentration in the
environment to which the materials will be exposed (the effect of pressure is
much smaller and can be ignored at crew cabin pressures < 1 Atm)
Past NASA programs used much higher oxygen concentrations than the
current 30% maximum for ISS/Shuttle (100% for Apollo and 70% for Skylab)
Configurations found to be acceptable under higher oxygen concentrations
are considered acceptable for lower oxygen concentrations
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

38

Dennis Griffin

8

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•

System Evaluations

When a flammability assessment results in an unacceptable configuration
reduction of flammability hazards is necessary to correct the problems
Primary methods used by NASA to reduce flammability hazards are:
– Minimize or limit the use of flammable materials by replacement with
nonflammable materials
– Eliminate or restrict propagation paths
• Covering flammable material with a nonflammable material
• Separation of flammable materials
– Isolate flammable materials from ignition sources or eliminate ignition sources

•
•

When results of flammability configuration analysis are inconclusive the
hardware configuration may be tested for flammability to determine
acceptability
Alternatively the hardware organization may choose to assume the
configuration is flammable and implement appropriate measures to
eliminate the flammability hazard
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin

9

System Evaluations
(continued)

To conduct a flammability configuration assessment - Evaluate the overall
hardware configuration:
– If the hardware is a closed box without vents or power, the materials inside will
not contribute to the fire hazard unless the box is constructed from flammable
materials – the box acts as a fire barrier
– If the only electrical power within the box is from batteries, the maximum shortcircuit power draw is nearly always too low to act as an ignition source
• NASA testing during the Apollo era showed that solid materials cannot be
ignited by electrical powers below 25 watts

•

Evaluate the way in which the hardware will be used:
– Hardware that is normally stowed in a fireproof container (stowage locker, many
NASA provided stowage bags and ISS crew transfer bags) and exposed to the
cabin environment for short periods during use may comply with stowage policy:
• Max dimensions 10 in. and unstowed less than 1 day/week
• Unstowed less than 1 hour/day
• Contingency use only
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

39

Dennis Griffin 10

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

System Evaluations
(continued)

• Maximum dimension <6 in. and always stowed when not in actual use
• Used only when covered by crew clothing
• Exposed surface area < 1 sq. ft. and always worn by crew when unstowed
– A full flammability analysis is required for hardware that is permanently mounted
in a rack or a locker space

•

Identify the major materials to be assessed
– Amounts greater than 0.1 pounds (or 6 linear inches maximum dimension and/or
10 square inches maximum area) in crew-habitable compartments
– Amounts greater than 1.0 pounds (or 12 linear inches) in other compartments
– Metallic panels and structures are nonflammable in Shuttle/ISS environment
(even magnesium and titanium) and need not be considered
– Metallic screens may be flammable and must be addressed
– Inorganic materials (ceramics) are also nonflammable in Shuttle/ISS
environments and need not be considered
– Adhesives (sandwiched between two surfaces) and materials covered
overcoated by nonflammable materials need not be considered
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 11

System Evaluations and
Flammability Data

Flammability characteristics of materials can be determined by consulting
the NASA/MSFC Materials and Processes Technical Information System
(MAPTIS) at http://map1.msfc.nasa.gov/WWW_Root/html/page7.html
An A-rating in MAPTIS for test conditions that are the same as the use
conditions means the material is acceptable in unlimited quantities
Any other rating means the material quantity/exposure must be controlled
The following key factors in materials
Note the following key factors when using MAPTIS flammability data:
– Oxygen concentration - MAPTIS flammability data obtained at higher oxygen
concentrations than the use concentration are always conservative (unpowered
and painted metal boxes, or hardware stowed/transferred in a standard locker,
Shuttle container or crew transfer bag for external use are acceptable)
– Material thickness – generally, flammability deceases with increasing thickness,
so the thickness associated with the MAPTIS rating should be the same as the
use thickness of the material, or it is acceptable if a thinner version of the same
material is rated A for flammability
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

40

Dennis Griffin 12

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

System Evaluations and
Flammability Data
(continued)

– Coatings on substrates – thin coatings bonded or sprayed on metallic substrates
are generally not flammable because the substrate acts as a heat sink, coating
flammability always decreases with increasing substrate thickness, so a coating
is always acceptable if it is A-rated for flammability on a thinner substrate, if the
coating is <2 mils thick and the metal substrate is >20 mils thick the coating is
acceptable, nonmetallic substrates are not effective as heat sinks

•

Determine fire propagation paths
– Determine whether the externally exposed materials represent fire propagation
paths exceeding 6” in crew compartments and 12” in other areas, propagation
from one flammable material application to the next is not acceptable, and must
be limited by fire breaks or positive action to control the hazard

•

Evaluate the ability of container to contain fire
– Sealed containers have no vents and are verified to a max. of 1X10-4 cm3/sec
• Contains no oxygen or inert gas an internal fire will not be initiated
• Contains air and nonflammable wall > 60 mils thick fire will be contained
• Internal void space limited to less than 30% of total volume acceptable
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 13

System Evaluations
(continued)

– Vented containers have active vents and associated cooling airflow
• Vent area <1% of total surface area and vents covered with a fine metal
(stainless steel or nickel, not Al, Ti or Mg) screen will contain fire
• Carefully evaluate/test and reduce hazard by:
- Minimize number and size of vents (avoid chimney effect)
- Cover vents with fine CRES or Ni screen
- Minimize free volume by adding nonflammable packaging materials , e.g.
polyimide foam
- If forced air flow not required, cover all vents and evaluate as intermediate
- Relation between flow rate and flammability complex
- At low flow rates flammable materials burn more vigorously with increasing
flow rate (decreasing effectiveness of the container)
- At high flow rate airflow will prevent stable flames (blowing out fire)
- Intermediate flow rates are worse case and are configuration and
microgravity dependent
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

41

Dennis Griffin 14

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

System Evaluations
(continued)

– Intermediate containers have no active vents or cooling airflow
• NASA-provided stowage lockers and bags are treated as containers that can
act as barriers to external fires
• Many commercial electronics items may be addressed by stowage policy or
can be obtained with metallic or nonflammable polycarbonate case and with
internal components packed closely such that void space is of no concern
• Internal ignition of small commercial items powered by alkaline batteries is
not considered credible
• Potential for ignition from external sources can be eliminated with
nonflammable case or by covering the case with a nonflammable material

June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 15

Processes to Control
Materials Flammability
Hazards

Elements of effective materials flammability control have successfully
precluded uncontrolled fires on orbit:
Requirements - NASA-STD-6001 implemented by program requirements
Guidelines - NSTS 22648, MSFC-PROC-1301, NSS 1740.15, etc.ration
Testing – active program for new materials, applications & configurations
Data bases - MAPTIS provides 85,000 test reports on >32,000 materials
– Used to publish MSFC-HDBK-527/JSC 09604, Materials Selection Lists for
Space Hardware Systems, all materials have unique NASA Material Code

•

Data requirement submittals – Type 1 Approval, MCPs, MIULs and MUAs
– Materials Control Plans – Describes how requirements will be implemented
– Materials Identification Usage Lists – Identifies where specific materials are used,
quantities, environments, application, thicknesses, cure, applicable test data, etc.
– Materials Usage Agreements – used to approve materials that fail to meet
requirements, describes application and hazard assessment with technical
acceptance rationale for evaluation of deviation
– Engineering Drawings
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

42

Dennis Griffin 16

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Processes to Control
Materials Flammability
Hazards (continued)

Design review/approval – M&P approval signature required on all
engineering documentation
Design analysis – formal hazards analysis, inspections, walk-throughs
Hazard mitigation – numerous techniques developed and documented
Oversight/Insight – M&P approval signature and representation required for
milestone design reviews (SRRs, PDRs, CDRs, DCRs), Safety Review
Boards/Panels, Certification of Flight Readiness Reviews (CoFRs)
Verification – data submittal, assessment and closure for generic
flammability hazard, reconcile as-designed versus as-built configuration
Materials and Processes (M&P) organization responsible for preparing and
approving certification that materials meet flammability requirements for
CoFR and Safety Panel
Reciprocal Materials Agreements
– JSC, MSFC, JPL, GRC, GSFC maintain Intercenter Materials Agreements
– NASA, ESA, NASDA and RSA maintain Interagency Materials Agreements
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 17

Flammability Reduction
Methods

Commercial items with flammable outer surfaces (ABS, PVC, polyethylene,
and/or polyamides) may be wrapped in nonflammable tape
– 3 mil aluminum tape (L-T-80) will protect most plastics, foams and cardboard
– Nonflammable fiberglass tape with silicone adhesive will provide same protection
if each rotation or wrap overlaps the previous one by 50%

•

•
•

For long-term applications and aesthetics, flammable surfaces may be
coated with nonflammable barrier such as Fluorel  (expensive, complex,
fair durability)
Common case materials for commercial items are generally extremely
flammable ABS or normally acceptable polycarbonate (up to 30%) or metal
Electrically powered items with internal flammable materials can usually be
treated or filled with a suitable material (nonflammable glass-filled-epoxy
potting compound) to provide protection from internal ignition sources
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

43

Dennis Griffin 18

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•

Wire and Cable

Most aerospace-grade electrical wire insulation is nonflammable in
Shuttle/ISS environments
Limitations are usually driven by such factors as flexibility and cut-through
resistance:
– Teflon (MIL-W-22759, MIL-C-27500, or equivalent) – good general-purpose wire
with high flexibility but poor cut-through resistance
– Polyimide (MIL-W-81381) – no longer used except in flat circuits because of
propensity to arc track
– Teflon-Polyimide Hybrids (MIL-W-22759, MIL-C-27500, or equivalent) – good
general-purpose wire with lower flexibility than Teflon but higher cut-through
resistance
– Tefzel (MIL-W-22759, MIL-C-27500, or equivalent) – suitable for external
applications but flammable in enriched oxygen with performance similar to hybrid
– ISS also uses a custom silicone-insulated construction in power circuits (SSQ
21652) that is nonflammable in ISS environments and exceptionally flexible

June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 19

Wire and Cable (continued)

COTS hardware typically has electrical wiring with PVC, polyethylene, or
chloroprene insulations which are flammable in all Shuttle/ISS environments
Their use is generally discouraged and may be used only when
demonstrated to be acceptable in configuration by flammability analysis
Commercial wiring inside electronics boxes and low-power signal wiring
outside such boxes can usually be accepted by this method
External power cables nearly always need to be replaced or protected from
ignition
Flammable insulation is acceptable on wires in external payloads that are
not powered (including during ground testing) until in vacuum

June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

44

Dennis Griffin 20

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•

Wire, Cable and Electrical
Accessories

Methods for protecting flammable cables include:
– Covering with braided Teflon sleeve, such as Goretex  sleeving
– Wrapping with nonflammable fiberglass-backed-silicone adhesive tape
– Covering with sleeve of 7.2 oz/yd2 natural Nomex HT-9040 fabric, beta cloth,
polybenzimidazole (PBl), or other nonflammable fabrics
– Covering by heat shrinking polyvinylidene fluoride or Teflon sleeve onto cable

•
•
•
•
•

Wire and cable accessories such as cable markers, spacers, and cable ties
should not contribute to fire propagation paths
Polyvinylidene fluoride/fluoroelastomeric cable markers are generally used
Other types of cable marker material may be acceptable if used in small
discrete amounts or covered with a clear Teflon TFE or FEP sleeve
Most types of spacers are usually acceptable because of heat sink effects
Acceptable lacing cords are Teflon TFE, Teflon TFE/fiberglass, or Nomex
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•

•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 21

Electrical Accessories
Hoses and Tubes

Acceptable cable ties can be made from ETFE or ECTFE fluoropolymers
If flammable cable tie wraps are used on nonflammable cables they should
be spaced at least 2 inches apart to prevent fire propagation
In air and moderately-enriched oxygen environments (up to 40 percent
oxygen) the shell of a metal shell electrical connector prevents fire
propagation from the nonmetallic materials used inside the connector to
other nonmetallic materials, regardless of the material inside the connector
Flammability configuration analysis is required for nonmetallic shell
connectors
Acceptability of the nonmetallic materials used inside the connector depends
on the flammability of the shell material and its ability to act as a fire barrier
External tubes or hoses (such as a vacuum cleaner hose) made from
flammable materials may be replaced with a nonflammable material or
covered with a fire barrier material
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

45

Dennis Griffin 22

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•

Hoses and Tubes
Hook and Loop Fasteners

Clear TFE or FEP Teflon tubes and hoses are readily available to replace
flammable materials
If flammable tubes or hoses must be used, the exterior can be protected by
a covering of 7.2 oz/yd2 natural Nomex HT-9040, PBI, Beta cloth, or other
nonflammable fabric
In these cases potential for ignition of the tube walls from inside must be
addressed
Although some hook-and-loop fastener materials are less flammable than
others, all common types are flammable in spacecraft habitable areas
To prevent long flame propagation paths, the following usage limits are
generally applied to hook and loop fasteners in habitable areas:
– Maximum size: 4 square inches, individually or in pieces
– Maximum length: 4 inches
– Minimum separation distance: 2 inches in any direction from another piece

•

NASA normally uses nylon fasteners in habitable areas for greater durability
and Nomex in EVA operations for good low-temperature performance
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 23

Stowage Bags and
Lockers

Metal stowage lockers that do not contain ignition sources are acceptable
Material selection criteria for nonmetallic stowage lockers must be based on
fire containment capability and should be supported by test data
Acceptable stowage bags may be constructed from the following fabrics:
– Beta cloth - acceptable for stowage of potentially flammable materials but has
low durability and a tendency to shed glass fibers
– Natural Nomex HT-9040 fabric weighing at least 7.2 ounces/square yard
– Lighter weights of natural Nomex HT-9040 are acceptable in double layers
– Navy blue single-layer Nomex weighing 6.5 ounces/square yard treated with
ammonia dihydrogen phosphate fire retardant
• Used on the Shuttle but discouraged for ISS because the fabric cannot be
wiped down without removing the fire retardant
– PBI and other flame-retardant fabrics (see MAPTIS)

•

These containers can have flammable items stowed inside them provided
they do not contain ignition sources and are not susceptible to spontaneous
ignition or chemical reaction
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

46

Dennis Griffin 24

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

•
•
•
•
•
•

Thermal Control Blankets

Thermal control blankets are the most widely used potentially flammable
external materials
Blankets typically contain 12 to 40 layers of film (0.0005 to 0.002 inches in
thickness) separated by some type of scrim cloth
Blanket materials are usually constructed of metal-coated polyethylene
terephthalate or polyimide film with an organic separator scrim
The inner and outer layers are generally heavier than the internal layers for
durability
Outer layer has controlled optical properties and is usually polyimide, silverTeflon, or Beta cloth
Acceptable thermal control blankets are typically constructed as follows:
– The outer layer is made of nonflammable material such as polyimide film (at least
1.5 mil thick), metal foil, silver-Teflon, or Beta cloth
– Internal layers can be a combination of flammable films or scrims
– Edges are hemmed or suitably finished so that the inner flammable layers are
protected and Atomic Oxygen is a consideration for long- term LEO exposure
June 2001

MSFC Materials,
Processes, &
Manufacturing
Department

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

Dennis Griffin 25

Fiber Reinforced
Laminates

• Fiber-reinforced laminates are used as structural materials
• Laminates may be flammable if used in thickness < 0.125
inches
• Flammability characteristics of thin laminates should be verified
by test or the laminates should be protected
• Flammable laminates may be used in external payloads
provided that ignition sources (electrical wires, heaters, etc.)
are not located within 6 inches of the laminates
• Otherwise firebreaks should be placed on the exposed surfaces
of these laminates at 12 inch intervals, e.g. Aluminum tape 3
mils thick X 3 inches wide (Federal Standard L-T-80)
June 2001

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Spacecraft Fire Safety Workshop

47

Dennis Griffin 26

Overview of ISS U.S. Fire Detection and Suppression System
Alana Whitaker
ISS ECLS Subsystem Manager
Fire Detection and Suppression Systems
NASA Johnson Space Center

Overview of ISS US Fire Detection
and Suppression System

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

1

Outline
• Intro to Fire Detection and Suppression (FDS)
• Description of (FDS) Subsystems
– Portable Fire Extinguishers (PFE)
• PFE Testing

– Smoke Detectors (SD)
• Ventilation and Air Monitoring/Supply Systems

– Portable Breathing Apparatus (PBA)

• FDS System Component Location and Status
• FDS System Capabilities
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

49

2

Outline (cont.)
• FDS Automatic and Manual Response
• Post Fire Atmosphere Restoration and Air
Quality Assessment
• FDS Research Needs

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

3

Intro to FDS on ISS
• Fire Detection and Suppression (FDS)
includes:
–
–
–
–

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Detection of smoke
Isolation of fires
The means to extinguish fires
The means to recover from fires

Alana Whitaker

50

4

Portable Fire Extinguisher (PFE)

PFE w/o Cover

PFE w/Cover (config. on orbit)
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

5

Portable Fire Extinguisher (PFE)
• PFE Characteristics
– Contains 6 lbs CO2 at 850psi
– Discharges in 45 sec.
– Has two nozzles:
• Conical Nozzle (open area nozzle) for
open area suppression
• Cylindrical Nozzle (closed volume
nozzle) for suppression
in closeout fire ports
Closed Volume Nozzle
Open Area Nozzle
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

51

6

PFE Cover
• PFE Cover Characteristics
– Made of Nomex
– Fits snuggly to PFE
– Keeps PFE within allowable touch temp. limits during
discharge (w/o Cover, PFE reaches 0 deg. F and nozzle -32
deg. F)

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

7

Fire Suppression Ports
• 1” or 0.5” diameter perforated access
ports in racks and standoffs for the
cylindrical nozzle (enclosed area
nozzle) to suppress fires
• O2 concentration in a rack is reduced to
< 10.5% within 1 min of suppression.

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

52

Suppression port nozzle inserted
into suppression port

8

Fire Suppression Testing
• Enclosed Volume Tests (cylindrical nozzle)
– All CO2 sensors show > 50% concentration for
volumes 60ft3 or less
– Good mix in enclosed volumes

• Open Volume Tests (conical nozzle)
– Fire is suppressed by a combination of blowing
the fire out (3 lb mass in first 10 sec) and
supplying CO2.

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

9

Smoke Detector

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

53

10

Smoke Detector
• Photoelectric Smoke Detector
– Based on smoke particles scattering a light beam
– Light from a laser source is reflected by mirrors back to a
photodiode (obscuration).
– Scattered light is measured by a second photodiode (scattering)
– Alarms are based on the voltage level generated by the
scattering photodiode.

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

11

Smoke Detector Principle
El ec tr onic s

Photodiodes
Laser Diode
Sc atter Path

Obs cur ati on Path

Airflow

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

54

12

Smoke Detectors in Ventilation
• Smoke Detectors are located on the ventilation filter intake ducts.
PERFORATED MANUAL
DAMPER VALVE

SUPPLY
DIFFUSER
(6 POSITIONS)

MANUAL DAMPER VALVE

PERFORATED MANUAL
DAMPER VALVE
CROSSOVER DUCT
OVERHEAD

TRANSITION DUCT ASSEMBLY
BACTERIA FILTER
ASSEMBLY (6 POSITIONS)

IMV
OUT
CDRA
SUPPLY

SMOKE DETECTOR
LABPD1
8
SMOKE DETECTOR
LABSD5 8

IMV IN
PORT
MANUAL DAMPER VALVE
ARS RETURN

DECK

MANUAL DAMPER VALVE

STBD

Lab Cabin Air Temperature and Humidity Control Assembly with Smoke Detectors

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

13

Smoke Detectors in Ventilation

Smoke Detector

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

55

14

Air Monitoring/Supply System
• Air components/concentrations are monitored
by the Major Constituent Analyzer (MCA) in
the LAB.
– Air samples are taken from each module and
routed to the sensor (mass spec.) in the MCA.
– MCA gives percent compositions. (Typical O2
levels on ISS are slightly less than 24%.)

• Metabolic O2 and N2 are supplied from
Orbiter, Service Module, and Progress
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

15

Total and Oxygen Partial Pressure Control
Not In Campout Mode
• Pressure control when Not in Campout Mode (nominal)
is done with closed-loop control
– Total Pressure
• The PCPs will be taking constant (1 Hz) total pressures
• If the total pressure drops below 14.25 psia the Nitrogen Isolation Valve
in the primary PCP will open
• When the total pressure >= 14.3 psia the Nitrogen Isolation Valve in the
primary PCP will close
– Oxygen Partial Pressure
• The MCA will be making constant readings of the Station atmosphere
• If the oxygen partial pressure drops below 3.00 psia the Oxygen
Isolation Valve in the primary PCP will be opened
• When the oxygen partial pressure >= 3.05 psia the Oxygen Isolation
Valve in the primary PCP will close
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

56

16

Total and Oxygen Partial Pressure Control
In Campout Mode
•

•
•

While in Campout Mode, the ppO2 in the Airlock will be controlled by the
following:
– If ppO2 < 2.7 psia in the Airlock, the Airlock PCA will open the PCP OIV
for 4 minutes +/- 10 seconds
– If the ppO2 > 2.85 psia in the Airlock, the Airlock PCA will open the PCP
NIV for 2 minutes +/- 2 seconds
– If either the PCP NIV or OIV was opened, wait 11 minutes after the valve
closes
– Repeat
Total pressure control is via manual operation of the Depress Pump
The rest of Station will continue to control total and oxygen partial pressures in
the standard method

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

17

Portable Breathing Apparatus (PBA)

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

57

18

Portable Breathing Apparatus (PBA)
• PBA is composed of:
– Mask
– 15 minute O2 bottle
– 30’ hose

• Provides O2 to crew in emergency situations
– Post-fire clean-up
– Environmental contamination
– Depressurization
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

19

FDS System Component Location
• Node 1 – 2 area Smoke Detectors (SD), 1 (PBA), 1 (PFE)
– Currently on orbit
• PFE and PBA are nominal (have not been used)
• SD#1 is powered, enabled, and nominal
• SD#2 is powered and disabled

• Lab – 2 area SD, 2 system rack SD (AR rack, CHeCS rack),
up to 13 experiment rack SD (3 experiment rack SD at 7A),
2 PBA, 2 PFE
– Currently on orbit
•
•
•
•

PFEs and PBAs are nominal (have not been used)
4 SDs (2 area and 2 rack) are powered, enabled, and nominal
1 payload SD is powered, enabled, and nominal
2 payload SDs operate intermittently based on payload operations

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

58

20

FDS System Component Location
• A/L – 1 area SD, 1 duct SD, 2 Pre-breathe Hose

Assemblies (PHA), 3 O2 bottles, 1 PHA spares
kit, 1 PFE
• MPLM – 1 duct SD, 1 PFE, 1 PBA (PBA & PFE
stored in Node1 when MPLM is not attached)

6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

21

FDS System Component Location
Zenith Truss

Cupola

X
4

LAC6

LAC5

DD s
CU

Z

LAC4

ISPR

1

P

LAC3

ISPR

1

LAC2

ISPR

1

LAC1

ISPR

1

ISPR

1

Node 1

A

PMA - 1

A

N1Z

N1P

Stowage 1

Stowag e 3

X
1

N1N

LAS5
MSS / Avionics

LAS4

LAS3

ISPR

1

LAS2

ISPR

1

LAS1

ISPR

1

ISPR

1

N1S

Stowage 2

LAS6
Mod. Temp. TCS /
Cabin Air Asse
mbly

Stowag e 4

X
2

LAF6
Lab

N

LAF5
Avionics #1 / Cond.
Water Storage

LAF3

Fuel Cell Water Sto
rage

LAF2

LAF1

ISPR (Window)

LAF4

ARS
(CDRA, MCA, TCCS)

F

Avionics #3

Avionics #2

F

1

Node 2

S
X
3

LAP6
Node 3

Suppression Port

LAP5

Low Temp. TCS /
Cabin Air Asse
mbly

Airlock

MSS / Avionics

LAP4

LAP3

ISPR

FSS / Stowage

1

LAP2

LAP1

ISPR

1

Node1

ISPR

1

LAB

Equipment Lock
AF1
Avionics

Portable Fire Extinguisher
Node 1

P

Crew Lock

Smoke Detector
Portable Breathing Apparatus

AA1
Ca Air Asse
bin
mbly

Visual Indicator (LED)
1

ISPR FDS equipment required depends on
payload and payload rack integration. These
schematics show worst case scenario until
payload rack designs are finalized.

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Airlock
Alana Whitaker

59

22

FDS System Capabilities
• Node 1, Lab, A/L, & MPLM FDS
– Fire emergency alarm received if any single SD
FIRE status flag is set equal to “FIRE”
– Scatter must exceed the fire threshold two
consecutive times, the detector then initiates an
active Built In Test (BIT), and the scatter must
still be exceeding the threshold after the BIT to
set the status flag equal to “FIRE.”
– Location may be determined by laptop.
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

23

FDS Automatic and Manual Response
(Overview)

• In case of fire or smoke
– The crew can manually push the fire alarm or the
Smoke Detectors can automatically initiate the fire
alarm to perform the following functions:
1) Remove power to racks-to isolate ignition sources
2) Isolate module by shutting off ventilation (close
IMVvalves, sample delivery systems, cabin fans)-to stop air flow
within module and exchange between modules

3) Inhibit introduction of O2 and N2 into module (inhibit

pressure control assembly in LAB)

*Crew can use PFE at their discretion*
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

60

24

Post Fire Atmosphere Restoration
• Gaseous Contaminants removed by the following:
– SM - Micropurification Unit(БМП)
• Removes 19 different gaseous contaminants using a catalytic
oxidizer (ambient) and expendable & regenerative charcoal
beds.

– FGB - Harmful Impurities Filter (ФВП)
• Removes gaseous trace impurities (particles of 0.5 to 300µm
to a level of 0.15 mg/m3).

– Lab - Trace Contaminant Control Subsystem
(TCCS)
• Removes gaseous contaminants using a catalytic oxidizer
(400ºC) and expendable sorbent and charcoal beds. Sorbent
contains LiOH which can remove acid gases.
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

25

Post Fire Atmosphere Restoration
– Carbon Dioxide Removal Assembly (CDRA)
• Removes CO2 from the atmosphere that was discharged from
the PFE

– Extra charcoal air filters
• Scrub the environment and contain 2% Pt for CO removal.

– CO2 Removal Kit (CRK)
• Consists of a portable fan assembly with a LiOH cartridge
adapter.
• Can be used with LiOH or ATCO catalyst canister for CO2 or
CO removal

– Venting module to space
• Only in worst case scenario
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

61

26

Post Fire Air Quality Assessment
• Air quality analysis done with the following
equipment:
– Compound-Specific Analyzer for Combustion Products
(CSA-CP)
– Carbon Dioxide Monitoring Kit (CDMK)

• Final analysis using Draeger detector tubes
• Atmospheric sampling, using GSC and AK-1 air
sampling assemblies, for delivery to ground.
6/25/01

Alana Whitaker

27

FDS Research Needs
• Data to support suppressant selection
– Suppressant
•
•
•
•

Effective
Not harm ECLSS or other equipment
No/low toxicity
Not require extensive clean up

• Microgravity research on suppression of fire
– Experiments needed on fabrics and items on orbit likely
to burn

6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

62

28

??Questions??

Contact Info.
Alana Whitaker - NASA/JSC
ISS ECLS Subsystem Manager
Fire Detection and Suppression Systems
6/25/01

NASA/CP—2003-212103

Alana Whitaker

63

29

An Introduction to Mars ISPP Technologies
Dr. Dale E. Lueck
Systems Engineering and Analysis Branch
Spaceport Engineering and Technology
NASA Kennedy Space Center

An Introduction to Mars ISPP
Technologies
Research Needs in Fire Safety
for the
Human Exploration and Utilization of Space
June 25-26, 2001
Dr. Dale E. Lueck

Cleveland, Ohio

NASA/John F. Kennedy Space Center

Background
•ISPP is an enabling technologies for HEDS missions to Mars.

•CO2 + 4 H2 → CH4 + 2 H2O
Electrolysis

2H2 + O2

(Sabatier Reaction with Water Electrolysis)
•Supplemental oxygen production required
•2 CO2 → 2 CO + O2

NASA/CP—2003-212103

65

Sabatier Reactor / Water Electrolysis
2nd Generation SR/WE Test Bed
•Exothermic Reaction, must
be cooled
•Operating Temp: 300°C
•Requires Hydrogen
Transport and Storage
•CO2 Freezer
•Cryo-coolers and Storage
for LCH4 & LOX
(common bulkhead storage
tank?)

Sabatier Reactor Flow Chart

NASA/CP—2003-212103

66

Alternative Fuels?
Methane requires 4 atoms of Hydrogen
! Lower hydrogen content improves ISPP
weight savings ratio
H/C
Tons H2
!

Methane
! Ethane
! Ethylene
! Benzene

4
3
2
1

!

5.1
4.7
3.4
2.1

Fuels and Oxidizer
ISPP saves weight by producing fuels
on Mars (5 – 8 tons over H2 brought)
! Producing fuels other than methane is
still in early development
! Producing oxygen saves 70+ tons for
MAV oxidizer.
! Life support and mobile power further
increases savings.
!

NASA/CP—2003-212103

67

Oxygen Production
!

All systems use electrolysis to produce
oxygen
!
!

!
!
!

Electrolysis of water from a reactor
Direct electrolysis of CO2

Electrolytes can be water, non-aqueous
liquids or solids.
4 e- / O2 molecule establishes current
Operating voltage and temperature establish
efficiency and materials of construction.

PEM Cell Electrolyzer Schematic
•Nafion is preferred PEM
•Platinum group metals
used for electrodes,
deposited on PEM

From Hamilton-Sundstrand
Web site

NASA/CP—2003-212103

• Uses Proton Exchange
Membrane (PEM) to
separate H2 and O2

68

Electrolyzer Stack for Seawolf Submarine

•100Cells/Stack (7 Cells / Inch)
•50-kW (360 SCFH-H2)
•High Current Density (1000 A/Ft2)
•Over 100,000 hours operation
•H2 & O2 at 3000 psi

Courtesy of J. Kosek, Giner, Inc.

Zirconia Solid Electrolyte Cell

Sridar, Gottmann, and Baird, AIAA Publication

NASA/CP—2003-212103

69

Zirconia Pros and Cons
•Direct electrolysis of CO2 with pure O2 separated.
•Good efficiency, about 1.5 V, similar to water
electrolysis.
•Very high operating temperatures, 800 - 1000°C.
•All ceramic construction in high temp zone.
•Fragile, easily cracked.
•Membrane failure could threaten entire output.
•Has been proposed for water vapor electrolysis

Possible Advantages for an Alternate System

•Lower temperatures
•<700°C…use metals in construction
•<270°C …use polymers and elastomers
•< 31°C …liquid CO2 as co-solvent
•Lower operating voltage…better efficiency
•More rugged construction, a robust assembly

NASA/CP—2003-212103

70

Reverse Water Gas Shift (RWGS)
•CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O (RWGS Reaction)
•Equilibrium constant is only 0.1, must remove
products to drive reaction to completion.
•Reactor requires pump, permeation filter and heat
exchangers to run.
•Electrolysis of water requires as much energy as
zirconia.
•Rugged and low temperature, but complex and heavy.

RWGS Reactor Assembly

NASA/CP—2003-212103

71

RWGS Test Bed

Molten Carbonate Electrolysis
Molten Carbonate Test Cell Design
Cover Detail

Anode Reaction
2 CO3-2 ↔ 2 CO2 + O2 + 4e-

Ni wire lead
Alumina tubes
Clearance for
5/8” tubes

Pt wire Anode

Cathode Reaction
2 CO2 ↔ CO + CO3-2

Alumina Crucible
and Cover

Porous Cathode

NASA/CP—2003-212103

72

Molten Carbonate Test Fixture

Molten Salt Results
•Li2O in Chloride melt
Pure oxygen at anode
•Current decreased to zero over a few hours
•Carbonate formation at cathode is likely
•Carbonate electrolysis at anode yields 2:1, CO2/O2
•Sustained reaction for 7 days
•Minimal loss of O2 production
•Temperature of operation: 550°C
•Cell voltage: ~ 0.8 Volts
•Platinum anode and cathode

NASA/CP—2003-212103

73

Non-Aqueous Solvents
•Potential Advantages
•Wide electrochemical window
•Low temperature operation
•CO2 a potential co-solvent
•Solvents Surveyed & Results
•Acetonitrile, DMSO, Propylene Carbonate
•C-V curves show CO2 reduction
•No evidence for oxide or carbonate solubility
•No oxygen generation at anode

Liquid CO2:

Electrochemical Reaction Vessel

Electrodes

Pressure Gauge

Product Vent
CO2 inlet

NASA/CP—2003-212103

74

Pro and Cons of Liquid CO2
•Advantages:
•Very high electrode concentrations " High current density
•No porous gas cathode required " Simplified Cathode
•If carbon forms " Twice as much O2 out/ CO2 in
•Disadvantages:
•CO2 at high pressure mixed with electrode products
•If carbon forms " must remove carbon periodically
•If CO forms, separation technology is critical for life
support uses.
•No known cell compartment separators that would
transport carbonate, and simplify product separation.

Ionic Liquids
•What are they?
•Low melting point ionic salts. By using large anions
and cations, a low temperature melt with conductivity
similar to molten salts can be obtained.
•Examples include pyridinium and imidizolium cations
with anions such as PF6-, BF4-, and many others.
•Desirable Properties
•Low temperature (-100 - 300°C).
•High conductivity (low I*R losses).
•Wide electrochemical window.
•Non-volatile.
•Miscible with or high solubility for CO2.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

75

Hurdles for Ionic Liquids
. Find one that carbonate is soluble in, or carbonate is the anion.
(Working with Prof. R. Rogers @Univ. of Alabama)

•Confirm CO2 reduction, preferably to CO.
•Confirm O2 production at anode (2:1, CO2/O2).
•Confirm long term stability and balanced cell reactions.
•Minimize cell voltage.
•Electrode materials
•Minimize I*R drop " thin electrolyte film, highly conductive.
•Construct porous support for electrolyte (similar to carbonate).
•Construct cell manifolds and multi-cell assemblies.

Mobile Oxide Ceramic Membranes
•Similar to Zirconia, but lower temperature.
•Demonstrated on NOx electrolysis.
•Oxide ion from CO2 reduction stabilized by
Ceramic Lattice structure.
•Operating temperatures 500 - 700°C allows
use of metal manifolds and seals.
Working with Prof. E. Wachsman at
Univ. of Florida to prove feasibility.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

76

Oxygen Production Conclusions
•Oxide ions as an electrochemical intermediate are only
viable in mobile oxide ceramics.
•Carbonate is formed from CO2 reduction in molten salts,
and produces a 2:1 CO2/O2 mixture at the anode.
•Other products of CO2 reduction do not produce O2 at
the anode.
•Carbonate melts and mobile oxide ceramics are probably
useable below 700ºC for CO2 electrolysis.
•Ionic liquids may be able to operate below 200ºC if
one compatible with carbonate can be found.

Acknowledgements
!

KSC researchers involved in ISPP work presented here
! Mike O’Neal
Bill Larson Clyde Parrish
! Bill Buttner
Jan Surma Curtis Ihlefeld

!

Approximately 50 workers have participated in ISRU
related technologies at KSC, including biological
research on plant growth chambers, Mars atmospheric
test chamber, static charge experiments, ISPP and
other technologies.

NASA/CP—2003-212103

77

List of Attendees
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
Legend:

Name
Organization
Gorecki, Chris
National Center for Microgravity Research
Jones, Sandi
National Center for Microgravity Research
Baker, Diane
Hill AFB
Beeson, Harold
NASA JSC-White Sands Test Facility
Erickson, Kenneth L.
Sandia National Labs - Albuquerque
Feikema, Douglas
NASA Glenn Research Center
Fernandez-Pello, Carlos
Univ. of California, Berkeley
Ferkul, Paul
National Center for Microgravity Research
Frazier, Wayne
NASA Headquarters
Griffin, Dennis
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
Hirsch, David
Honeywell, NASA White Sands Test Facility
Jackson, Brian (James)
NASA Glenn Research Center
Linteris, Greg
Nat Inst of Standards and Technology
Miller, Fletcher
National Center for Microgravity Research
Nayagam, Vedha
National Center for Microgravity Research
Olson, Sandra
NASA Glenn Research Center
Orvis, Leigh
Southwest Research Institute
Pearlman, Howard
NASA Glenn Research Center
Pedley, Michael
NASA Johnson Space Center
Sacksteder, Kurt
NASA Glenn Research Center
Stemphoski, Thomas
TRW - Tyndall AFB
Tewarson, Archie
Factory Mutual Corporation
T'ien, James
National Center for Microgravity Research
Torero, Jose
Dept. of Fire Protection Eng, Univ. of Maryland
Tucker, James
Applied Research Assoc, Wright-Patterson AFB
Wu, Ming-Shin
National Center for Microgravity Research
Cleary, Thomas
Nat Inst of Standards and Technology
Disimile, Peter
Wright-Patterson AFB/Univ of Cinncinnati
Hegde, Uday
National Center for Microgravity Research
Hunter, Gary
NASA Glenn Research Center
Lueck, Dale
NASA Kennedy Space Center
Piltch, Nancy
NASA Glenn Research Center
Quintiere, James
Dept. of Fire Protection Eng, Univ. of Maryland
Roby, Richard
Combustion Science & Engineering
Silver, Joel
Southwest Sciences, Inc.
Sunderland, Peter
NASA Glenn Research Center
Suo-Anttila, Jill M.
Sandia National Labs - Albuquerque
Urban, David L.
NASA Glenn Research Center
Vanderwal, Randy
NASA Glenn Research Center
VonJouanne, Roger
Boeing - Houston
Weiland, Karen
NASA Glenn Research Center
Young, Rebecca
NASA Kennedy Space Center
Yuan, Zeng-Guang
National Center for Microgravity Research
Abbud-Madrid, Angel
CCACS, Colorado School of Mines
Baum, Howard
Nat Inst of Standards and Technology
Bennett, Joseph (Michael) Wright-Patterson AFB
Dierdorf, Doug
Air Force Fire Research Laboratory
Faeth, Gerard
Dept. of Aerospace Eng, Univ. of Michigan
Friedman, Robert
NASA Glenn Research Center
Gritzo, Louis A.
Sandia National Labs - Albuquerque
Kailasanath, K.
Naval Research Lab
King, Merrill
NASA Headquarters
Labus, Thomas
National Center for Microgravity Research
Mather, Douglas
Univ. of NM - Ctr for Glbl Envr Tech
Nam, Soonil
Factory Mutual Corporation
Olson, John
Eglin AFB
Ross, Howard
NASA Glenn Research Center
Ruff, Gary A.
NASA Glenn Research Center
Struk, Peter
National Center for Microgravity Research
Sung, C.J. (Jackie)
National Center for Microgravity Research
Takahashi, Fumiaki
NASA Glenn Research Center
Tapscott, Robert
GlobeTech, Inc.
Whitaker, Alana A.
NASA Johnson Space Center
Yang, Jiann C.
Nat Inst of Standards and Technology
Prevention - Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
Detection - Smoke and Fire Detection
Response - Fire and Post-Fire Response

NASA/CP—2003-212103

79

Working Group
Admin
Admin
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Prevention
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Detection
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response
Response

E-Mail
Christine.R.Gorecki@grc.nasa.gov
Sandra.L.Jones@grc.nasa.gov
diane.baker@hill.af.mil
harold.d.beeson1@wstf.nasa.gov
klerick@sandia.gov
douglas.feikema@grc.nasa.gov
ferpello@euler.me.berkeley.edu
Paul.V.Ferkul@grc.nasa.gov
wfrazier@mail.hq.nasa.gov
dennis.e.griffin@msfc.nasa.gov
david.b.hirsch1@wstf.nasa.gov
james.b.jackson@grc.nasa.gov
linteris@nist.gov
fletcher.j.miller@grc.nasa.gov
Vedha.Nayagam@grc.nasa.gov
sandra.l.olson@grc.nasa.gov
lorvis@swri.org
howard.pearlman@grc.nasa.gov
michael.d.pedley@jsc.nasa.gov
kurt.sacksteder@grc.nasa.gov
Tom.Stemphoski@tyndall.af.mil
archibald.tewarson@fmglobal.com
jst2@po.cwru.edu
jltorero@eng.umd.edu
james.tucker@wpafb.af.mil
Ming-Shin.Wu@lerc.nasa.gov
thomas.cleary@nist.gov
peter.disimile@wpafb.af.mil
Uday.G.Hegde@grc.nasa.gov
gary.w.hunter@grc.nasa.gov
Dale.Lueck-1@ksc.nasa.gov
nancy.d.piltch@grc.nasa.gov
jimq@eng.umd.edu
rroby@csefire.com
jsilver@swsciences.com
Peter.B.Sunderland@grc.nasa.gov
jmsuoan@mailgate.sandia.gov
david.l.urban@grc.nasa.gov
Randy.VanderWal@lerc.nasa.gov
Roger.VonJouanne@HSV.Boeing.com
Karen.J.Weiland@grc.nasa.gov
Rebecca.Young-1@ksc.nasa.gov
zgyuan@grc.nasa.gov
aabbudma@mines.edu
howard.baum@nist.gov
Joseph.Bennett@wpafb.af.mil
Doug.Dierdorf@tyndall.af.mil
gmfaeth@umich.edu
macfried@xcelnet.net
lagritz@sandia.gov
kailas@lcp.nrl.navy.mil
mking1@mail.hq.nasa.gov
Thomas.L.Labus@grc.nasa.gov
mather@nmeri.unm.edu
soonil.nam@fmglobal.com
john.olson@eglin.af.mil
howard.d.ross@grc.nasa.gov
gary.a.ruff@grc.nasa.gov
Peter.M.Struk@grc.nasa.gov
cjs15@po.cwru.edu
Fumiaki.Takahashi@grc.nasa.gov
GlobeTech@rmi.net
alana.a.whitaker1@jsc.nasa.gov
jiann.yang@nist.gov

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

2. REPORT DATE

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

Conference Publication

April 2003
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5. FUNDING NUMBERS

Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space
Proceedings and Research Plan

WBS–22–101–52–02

6. AUTHOR(S)

Gary A. Ruff
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 – 3191

E–13759

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20546– 0001

NASA CP—2003-212103

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

Contents were reproduced from author-provided presentation materials. Proceedings of a conference held at and
sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio,
June 25–26, 2001. Responsible person, Gary A. Ruff, organization code 6711, 216–433–5697.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Unclassified - Unlimited
Subject Category: 18

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

Distribution: Nonstandard

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301–621–0390.
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

The purpose of the workshop documented in this publication was to bring together personnel responsible for the design
and operations of the International Space Station (ISS) and the fire protection research community to review the current
knowledge in fire safety relative to spacecraft. From this review, research needs were identified that were then used to
formulate a research plan with specific objectives. In this document, I have attempted to capture the very informative and
lively discussions that occurred in the plenary sessions and the working groups. I hope that it will be useful to readers and
serve as a significant step in assuring fire protection for the crews of current and future spacecraft.

14. SUBJECT TERMS

15. NUMBER OF PAGES

Spacecraft fire safety; Flammability; Fire detection; Fire suppression; Fire prevention
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF REPORT

Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF THIS PAGE

Unclassified

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF ABSTRACT

81
16. PRICE CODE
20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT

Unclassified
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
298-102

