MICROGRAVITY SMOLDERING COMBUSTION
ON THE USML-1 SPACE SHUTTLE MISSION
Dennis P. Stocker , Sandra L Olson*, Jose L Torero' and A. Carlos FetnandezPello+
.
.
*NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
+Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, California.

ABSTRACT

Preliminary results from an experimental study of the smolder characteristics of a porous
combustible material (flexible polyurethane foam) in normal and microgravity are presented. The
experiments, limited in fuel sample size and power available for ignition, show that the smolder process
was primarily controlled by heat losses from the reaction to the sumunding environment. In microgravitu,
the reduced heat losses due to the absence of natural convection result in only slightly higher
temperatures in the quiescent microgravity test than in normal gravityl but a dramatically larger
production of combustion products in a// microgravity tests. Parficularly significant is the proportionately
larger amount of carbon monoxide and light organic compounds produced in microgravity, despite
comparable temperatures and similar char patterns. This excessive production of fuel-rich combustion
products may be a generic characteristic of smoldering polyurethane in microgravity, with an associated
increase in the toxic hazard of smolder in spacecraff.
INTRODUCTION

Smoldering is a non-flaming surface combustion reaction that takes place in the interior of
porous combustible materials. A smolder reaction will propagate through the porous material if enough
heat, generated by the reaction and any external source, is transferred to the unburnt fuel to initiate a
smolder surface reaction. However, for the smolder reaction to be sustained, oxygen must also be
transported to the reaction zone. The balance between the transport of oxidizer and the transport

Of

energy determines the rate and characteristics of the reaction (Ohlemilleri , Dtysdale2, Torero3, Torero,
et

When the smolder conditions are such that the resulting smolder reaction is vigorous, its rate of

propagation is directly proportional to the rate of oxygen supply. When it is weak, however, the rate Of
heat loss determines whether the reaction will continue to propagate or eventually extinguish (Dosanjh,
et ai.? Torero3; Torero, et a ~ ~ ) .

Joint '%+I " Science Review for USMLl and USMP-1 with the Micmgmvity Measurement Group, September
22-24, 1993, Huntsville, Alabamq USA.

609

Although smoldering is present in a variety of combustion processes, it is of particular interest in
fire safety because of its role as a potential fire-initiation source. It can propagate slowly, undetected, for
long periods of time, and suddenly undergo a transition to flaming. The products of smolder combustion
themselves are toxic. Recently, with the planned establishment of a space station, there has been an
increased interest in the study of smoldering in microgravity because of the potential danger of a
smolder-initiated fire in remote facilities. The absence of gravity is expected to influence smoldering
through its effed on the mass and heat transport within the smoldering material.
Although considerable work has been conducted to date on smoldering at normal gravity
(reviews on the subject can be found in the works of Ohlemillerl
information is available on smolder in low gravity.

and Drysdale2), very limited

This paper reports the first experimental study of

smolder initiation in the extended period of microgravity that is available on the Space Shuttle. These
tests are part of an ongoing broader program to study smolder in low gravity.
Cantwell and F e m a n d e z - P e l l ~ and~Torero et a1.8, conducting experiments in a Drop Tower
~~ ,
(NASA Lewis, 2.2 sec of
(NASA, 20-25 sec

g) and in KC-135 and Leajet aircraft following a parabolic trajectory
g per parabola), made some preliminary observations of the effed of gravity

changes on the smolder characteristics of polyurethane foam. However, due to the slow propagation of
smolder, the short test periods provided only limited information about smoldering in microgravity.
These studies confirmed that in microgravity, as in normal gravity, smoldering is controlled by
the balance between the oxygen supplied to the reaction zone and the heat transferred to and from the
reaction zone to the virgin fuel ahead. The absence of gravity resulted in an enhancement of the fuel
heating ahead of the reaction zone due to reduced natural convective cooling, but also resulted in a
decrease in the smolder reaction temperature due to the reduction in oxygen supplied. From these works
it was concluded that in microgravity, smoldering would be generally weaker than in normal gravity

because of the reduction in the buoyancy-induced oxidizer flow. However, if smoldering occurred under
conditions such that it is controlled
convective heat

by heat loss rather than oxidizer flow, then the reduction of

loss in microgravity should result in increased temperatures and a resulting

enhancement of the smolder process.
The present work attempts to provide further information about smoldering in a microgravity
environment. To provide for extended periods of microgravity, a comprehensive smolder experiment
was approved for testing on the Space Shuttle and is now under development. A preliminary set of tests
were approved to specifically study the ignition and transition effects of low-gravity smolder. The
Spacelab Glovebox on the United States Microgravity Laboratory mission, of the Space Shuttle
Columbia, of June/July 1992 (USML-1, STS-SO), was used for these preliminary tests. The use of the
Glovebox limited the size of the fuel Sample that could be tested and the power available for ignition, but

610

had the advantage of much reduced costs and development time. Although the small sample size and
low ignition power limits the amount of infomation to be obtained from these preliminary experiments,
the primary objective was to investigate the ignition characteristics for smolder propagation in
microgravity. This information would be very useful in the design of the comprehensive smolder
experiment to be carried out at a later time in the Space Shuttle.
A series of comparative tests were also conducted in normal gravity. The normal and
microgravity smolder characteristics were determined from interpretation of the available temperature
histories obtained at several locations within the sample, visual inspection of the smoldered foam
sample, and analysis of the post-combustion gases.
1. EXPERIMENT

A. Flight Hardware
The flight hardware consisted of four experiment modules, two data displays, a control box, and
four cables. Each module contained a cylindrical foam sample, with an embedded igniter, and a fan to
produce a forced flow in the longitudinal direction. A photograph of the assembled hardware, with one
module, is presented in Figure 1. The test variables during the experiment were the igniter geometry
and the convective environment. Through the use of an axial igniter (as in Figure 1) and a plate igniter,
both radial and axial smolder were investigated. For each igniter geometry, a test was conducted in a
quiescent environment and with a low-velocity air flow for a total of four test conditions, as shown in
Table I.
Each experiment module was a sealed polycarbonate box, nominally 0.15 m x 0.15 m x 0.20 m,
filled with dry air at one atmosphere pressure. The fuel consisted of a 50 mm diameter, 80 mm long
cylinder of open-cell, unretarded, white flexible polyurethane foam, with a 26.5 Kg/m3 density and 0.975
void fraction, which weighed 4 grams. The fuel sample was positioned axisymmetrically in a
polycarbonate tube, 76 mm in diameter, that had a fan at one end to provide a convective flow past the
sample. The fan was oriented to pull the air past the foam, and screens were placed at both ends of the
cylinder to improve flow uniformity. For the quiescent tests, large sections of the tube were removed to
provide free exchange of air throughout the module. Hot-wire measurements of the fan-induced air flow
indicated that the velocity around the foam sample was of the order of 100 mm/sec.

lndired

obselvations indicate that the fan also induces a localized flow through the foam. No measurements
were made, however, of this internal flow. The plate and axial igniters were resistively-heated elements,
consisting of nickel-chromium wire sheathed in ceramic.
The axial igniter was 95 mm long and 3 mm in diameter, but only 42 mm of its center seaion
was heated. The plate igniter was 7 mm thick, 51 mm in diameter and was sandwiched in the foam,

611

centered at 20 mm from the fan end of the fuel sample, such that the smolder wave propagated along
the length of the sample in both directions away from the igniter. With the fan on, the air flow through the
sample results in an opposed-flow smolder upstream of the igniter, and a forward-flow smolder in the
downstream region. The axial igniter ignited the fuel sample along the centerline such that the smolder
wave propagated radially outward toward the edges of the cylinder. The maximum igniter power was
approximately 29 watts, due to Glovebox limits.
The foam sample was instrumented with six sheathed, cold-junction compensated, chromelalumel thermocouples, 0.5 mm in sheath diameter, to measure the smolder reaction temperature and its
propagation throughout the sample. A seventh thermocouple was used to measure the local gas-phase
temperature outside the foam. The positions of the six thermocouples within the foam sample are
indicated in Table II, for the modules with an axial igniter. The output of the thermocouples and the
igniter current was recorded with a video camera through the use of two data displays (with four readings
each). A second video camera viewed the side of the smoldering sample.

B. Experimental Procedure
Testing a single module at a time, the hardware was assembled by the crew member within the
Glovebox. Prior to ignition, the fan was activated for those tests requiring air flow. The igniter was then
energized and the current potentiometer was adjusted to the appropriate level. Power was applied for 10

to 24 minutes, depending on the test. The progress of the smolder reaction was observed for up to an
hour through the temperature displays, the smoke production, and the discoloration or charring of the
foam. After the test was completed, the hardware was disassembled and the module was stowed. The
four planned smolder combustion tests were successfully conducted during the USML-1 mission, the first
by Dr. Lawrence DeLucas, and the following three by Col. Carl Meade.
Following the mission, gas samples were drawn from the modules for analysis and the foam
samples were removed for inspection. Normal-gravity tests were conducted in the flight hardware to
allow comparison of the smolder characteristics in normal gravity and microgravity. These tests were
identical to those conducted in space in regards to the igniter power, flow conditions, and time sequence.
The comparison normal-gravity tests were conducted with the foam samples in a horizontal orientation,
such that the gravity vector was perpendicular to the axis of the foam. Additional tests were performed
with other foam orientations to observe the effect of gravity on the normal-gravity smolder.
The test nomenclature and specific test conditions are listed in Table I. The nomenclature used
to describe the four tests is based on the order that the tests were conducted in during the USML-1
mission. During the first microgravity test (l.O), there was a malfunction which affected the display for
thermocouples 5 to 7. During the mission, it was not clear whether the malfunction also affected the

612

igniter current reading which was on the same display. The uncertainty about the igniter current and a
concern about exceeding the Glovebox power limits prompted the authors to have Dr. DeLucas reduce
the igniter power to a level determined from normal-gravity igniter characterization testing. However, the
resulting heating rate was less than desired, so the igniter power was then increased to an intermediate
level, bringing the heating rate to an acceptable level. The malfunction did not reoccur during the
mission; it was later determined to be the result of a failed reference junction, for thermocouples 5 to 7,
located on that single module. Tests 2.x to 4.x were all conducted with the maximum ignition power
available from the Glovebox.
During test 2.0, the fan was shut off at approx. 8 minutes, per the nominal test procedure,
because the measured igniter temperature fell below the desired level. The igniter temperatures also fell

below the desired level in test 4.0, but at the authors instruction, Col. Meade kept the fan on, in order to
simplify the interpretation of the results. As previously described, these procedures were duplicated in
the comparison normal-gravity testing.

II. RESULTS
The test results are based on the temperature histories provided by the thermocouples, a visual
inspection of the burnt foam samples, and the composition of the post-combustion gases. Since the
temperature data for the plate igniter tests (3.0 and 4.0) is not yet available, the results and conclusions
will primarily deal with the axial-igniter tests (1.x and 2.x). The results from the plate-igniter tests are only
briefly reported.
A. Temperature Histories
The temperature histories provided by thermocouples 1 to 4 in the microgravity and normalgravity experiments for test 1 (axial ignitedfan off) and test 2 (axial ignitedfan on) are presented in
Figures 2 and 3, respectively. The temperature histories for the other thermocouples will not be
presented here. They were positioned near the surface of the foam to detect flaming, which did not occur
in any of the tests. Note that the thermocouple temperatures have not been corrected for heat loss.
Given the relative mass of the thermocouples as compared to that of the foam, it is possible that the
measured temperatures were significantly affected by conductive losses. Normal-gravity tests also
suggest that the temperatures may have been depressed due to the thermocouple's compression of the
foam, which may have locally inhibited smolder.
The result of the irregular ignition profile in test l.x, as previously described, can be Seen in
Figure 2 for both microgravity and normal-gravity runs. It is evident from the temperature histories that
the smolder self-extinguished at both gravity conditions. All four thermocouples reached Peak

613

temperatures at about the same time. If the smolder was self-propagating, the temperature histories
would indicate the radial propagation of the smolder wave, with peaks of about 400°C displaced in time.
All four temperatures dropped after the peak temperature was reached, even though the igniter was still

energized. The temperatures dropped rapidly after the igniter was turned off at 9.5 minutes, which
demonstrates the large conductive losses for these small samples. The igniter current was held steady at
3.9 amps from 4.0 to 9.5 minutes, so the initial drop in temperature must be due to a decrease in the

heat of the reaction, as will be discussed later.
From a comparison of the microgravity and normalgravity temperature profiles, it appears that
gravity had a limited effect on the temperature histories. The peak temperatures were greater in
microgravity than normal gravity for all four thermocouples, with the difference increasing with distance
from the igniter. Whereas the peak temperature difference was about 16°C at the igniter, it was 50°C at
thermocouple 4, which is 5 mm from the foam surface. The temperature difference is presumably due to
buoyant cooling in normal gravity, which would be most strongly felt near the surface of the foam.
The temperature histories for test 2.x, shown in Figure 3, can be more easily interpreted, as the
igniter was held at a constant power. In general, the temperature profiles are similar to those for test 1,
except for the irregular heating profile in test 1. Extinction is again indicated by the temperature profiles;
the temperatures drop slightly while the igniter is energized, and rapidly when the igniter is tumed off.
However, test 2.x has the unusual feature that the fan was initially on, and then tumed off at
approximately 8 minutes. Deactivating the fan caused the igniter temperature to gradually increase about
23°C in microgravity, until the igniter was turned off. Meanwhile, at thermocouples 2 to 4, the

temperature rose 35 to 43OC in microgravity. In normal-gravity, the deactivation of the fan caused a
minor temperature increase of 6 to 11°C. After the fan was shut off, the temperatures were found to
increase the most at the thermocouples nearest the foam surface, in both microgravity and normal
gravity. This observation is not surprising, since the convective heat loss is the strongest near the foam
surface. The temperature increase associated with the fan deactivation was presumably smaller in
normal gravity due to the continued presence of the buoyant cooling.
The contribution from the igniter was measured in normal gravity by insulating the igniter with
fiberglass insulation and recording the temperature history in the absence of smolder. This data is plotted
in Figure 4 along with the igniter temperatures from runs 2.0 and 2.1. The resulting difference in
temperatures is approximately the contribution from the exothermic smolder reaction. In both tests, it can
be deduced that the reaction started at approximately 1.5 minutes and increased until 4 minutes, at
which time the reaction decayed to extinction. Extinction appears to have occurred at some point
between 4 and 7 minutes. The differences in the two tests is not believed to be significant. In test 2.x, it
is also notable that the peak temperatures (prior to the fan deactivation) for the two gravity conditions are

614

P-

within 15°C of each other, for all four thermocouples. This suggests that the low forced flow may have
been comparable to any buoyant effects during the smolder. The temperature histories of Figures 2 and
3 can be used to roughly calculate smolder propagation velocities using the method previously

developed for ground-based experiments (Torero, et a ~ ~The smolder velocity is calculated from the
).
known distance between two consecutive thermocouples and the time lapse for a given temperature to
be attained by the thermocouple. That time is determined by the intersection of the tangent to the
temperature cuwe at the inflection point and a horizontal line at the pre-established temperature (350°C).
This technique is not truly applicable for this experiment since the measured temperatures did not reach
35OoC, except at the igniter. However, approximate information about the smolder propagation velocity

can be obtained by extrapolating the tangent of the temperature cuwe (at the inflection point) until it
reaches the 350°C. From the temperature histories of run 2.0, using this technique, it is found that the
resulting smolder velocity decays from approximately 0.08 mm/s between thermocouples 1 and 2, to
0.04 between thermocouples 2 and 3, and to 0.02 mm/s between thermocouples 3 and 4. Thus, the
smolder was not steady but decayed to extinction. Similar trends are obtained from the temperature
histories of test 1. For an average smolder velocity of 0.04 mm/s, and a smolder wave propagating for
approximately 18 mm (from thermocouple 1 to 4), the smolder time was estimated to be 7.5 minutes,
which is roughly consistent with the temperature profiles of Figure 3. The smolder propagation velocities
obtained for the normal-gravity tests experiments are similar. The calculated smolder velocities are of
the same order of magnitude as those measured in larger experiments of opposed-flow smolder at low
flow velocities (0.5 mm/sec) and natural convection smolder (Torero4). They correspond to the "weak"
smolder cases tested. The maximum smolder velocities measured in those experiments were obtained
for flow velocities of 3 mm/sec and were of the order of 0.15 mm/sec.
B. Char Patterns

During the testing, the smoldering foam was observed to expand and smoke, much of which
later condensed as a yellow residue on the module interior. Upon removal after testing, the samples were
cut open to reveal the extent of the smolder propagation. Photographs of the smoldered samples from
tests 1.x and 2.x are shown with microgravity samples in Figures 5 and normal gravity samples in Figure
6, respectively. Each sample was cut in half on its axis; the interior view of a single half is shown. The

normal-gravity tests were conducted with the sample in a horizontal orientation; with the gravity vector
oriented down.
The plane of the cut for each sample was selected to include the igniter thermocouple. In most
Of

the samples, the position of the igniter thermocouple can be seen as a narrow dark line. The dark line

results from charring from the hot thermocouple, suggesting that thermocouple measurements could

615

have been significantly affected due to conductive heat loss along the thermocouple. The narrow width
of the charred line implies that the conduction along the thermocouple had a localized effect and
probably did not effect the smolder propagation in general. This is not surprising, given the foam's low
thermal diffusivity compared to that of the thermocouple sheath.
In the char pattem for test 1.0, it can be seen that smolder propagated symmetrically outward
from the igniter, in an oval shape. The dark charred region extends to within about 1 cm of the sample
edge, except at the ends of the sample. A pyrolysis zone, typical of foam exposed to low temperatures,
is visible as a light brown discoloration. This zone is roughly 5 mm thick, indicating that the smolder
reactions reached within about 5 mm of the surface. Accounting for the limited propagation at the ends, it
is estimated that the char and pyrolysis regions include about 50% of the sample volume. Based on
previous studies (Ohlemillerl ; Torero3), the extent of the propagation was somewhat surprising for the
low temperatures measured. However, it is in approximate agreement with the propagation velocities

estimated from the temperature histories.
The char pattem from normal-gravity test 1.lwas found to be similar to the pattem from test 1.O.
The visible extent of propagation was similar in both tests, but there were two notable differences.
First, large voids, on the order of 1 cm long, were created in the normal-gravity char region,
whereas there were none apparent in the microgravity char. The voids were found in other, but not all, of
the normalgravity tests and none of the microgravity tests. It is speculated that the voids result from
gravitational forces on the weakened polymeric structure, but it is not clear what controls their
occurrence. A close comparison of the char structure of the microgravity and normal-gravity tests also
shows significant differences. The normal-gravity voids had a crust of melted material which appeared to
clog the foam pores. Microscopic observation of the normal-gravity char showed that discolored
filaments in some cases had melted into spheres. Furthermore, strong signs of fuel pyrolysis could also
be observed at the edges of the char region. These observations are typical of a low temperature

smolder process (DosanjhS, Torero3). In contrast, the char in the microgravity samples was more typical
of high temperature smolder with a fibrous, relatively dense structure, despite the similar temperature
profiles.
Second, the effect of gravity is also evident even in the presence of forced convection in that the
normalgravity smolder did not propagate as far in the downward direction. In normal-gravity, natural
convection induces an upward air flow, inhibitingthe downward (opposed) propagation of the smolder, as
seen in Figure 6.
With the fan-induced concurrent flow in test 2.x, the smolder also propagated substantially
farther toward the fan, particuhrly in microgravity. The dark char, with forced flow in microgravity (test
2.0), reached within about 5 mm of the fan end of the sample, whereas the char was roughly 1 cm from

616

.
the end without flow (tests 1.0 and 1.1). The char, with forced flow in normal-gravity (test 2.1), was also
about 1 cm from the end. The pyrolysis zone, with forced flow at either gravity level, reached to (or
nearly to) the end of the foam, unlike the quiescent tests. A close inspection of the samples from test 2.x
has also revealed significant concentrations of tar at the fan end of the sample, again particularly in
microgravity.
In the upstream end of the foam, the forced flow had a minimal effect in microgravity. The
mm)
shape of the dark char region appears to be slightly more streamlined (=I with flow (test 2.0), than
without (test 1.0). The char region with flow is slightly wider within 0 to 2 cm of the upstream end.
Convective effects noted at both ends of the fan thus suggest that the smolder and pyrolysis were
enhanced by convective mass transport in this region.
Except for the fan end, normal-gravity tests with the foam oriented vertically so that the forced
flow opposed the buoyant flow show smolder patterns that are similar to the microgravity ones. This
suggests that the two convective effects counteract one another in this region. At the fan end, however,
the char patterns indicate that in this region, the fan-induced flow enhances smolder, especially in
microgravity. Whether the fan-induced flow is stronger or weaker than that induced by natural convection
is difficult to determine, since we do not have direct measurements of the flow velocity inside the foam,
we can only use this type of indirect observation to infer the flow pattern in the sample interior.
The tests with the plate igniter show similar results to those for the axial igniter. The char region
forms a hemisphere with the center plane at the igniter, except downstream from the igniter in the
microgravity experiment when the fan is on, where the smolder is enhanced, as in the test 2.0. The dark
char region extends about as far from the igniter as with the axial igniter. However, it appear's that the
light-colored pyrolysis zone extends somewhat further along the axis, away from the fan, presumably due
to the distance from the foam surface and the subsequent insulation from heat losses.
C. Gas Analyses

The results of the analyses of the post-combustion gases are presented in Table Ill, for the
microgravity and normal-gravity tests. Only the major components have been included in this report.
The results are based on analyses, performed at the Toxicology Laboratory at NASA Johnson, with both
Gas Chromatography (GC) and Gas ChromatographylMassSpectrometry (GUMS).
Oxygen depletion and the production of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and hydrocarbon
species are good indicators of the combustion reaction characteristics. However, in interpreting the data,
it Should be kept in mind that smoldering is a low-temperature surface reaction that is generally oxygen
limited. It is seen that the microgravity smolder tests produced significant amounts of O

n mo~oxide

and carbon dioxide, as well as a number of light organic compounds. These species are characteristic of

617

pyrolysis and oxygen-limited combustion. It is believed that the chlorinated compounds are contaminants
resulting from the methylene chloride that was used to solvent bond the joints in the polycarbonate
modules.
Comparison of the species concentrations reveals that the amounts of the gaseous products
roughly corresponds to the time that the igniter was on, for a specific gravity level. This observation
suggests that fuel pyrolysis may have contributed significantly to the production of gaseous components.
Microgravity test 2.0 (axial igniter, fan on) produced the largest concentrations of combustion
products. This test did have the greatest smolder propagation, particularly toward the fan. However, the
difference between the products of tests 1.0 and 2.0 is far too great to only result from this difference in
the smolder propagation. This implies that the smolder consumed a larger amount of fuel per unit
volume in microgravity than normal gravity.
The notmalgravity tests produced these species in substantially smaller amounts than the
microgravity tests. This is somewhat surprising, since the extent of smolder propagation as apparent in
the char patterns was not strongly effected by gravity for any of the tests. Yet in all cases, the amount of
carbon monoxide was much greater (89 to 3900 ppm) than that produced in normal gravity (e3 to 6
ppm). This suggests that the reaction may have been oxygen limited. In most cases, the microgravity
tests produced twice as much carbon dioxide as the normal-gravity tests. It must be kept in mind that the
measured temperatures were too low for the gas-phase oxidation of carbon monoxide (Glassmang).
Methane is evident in the microgravity cases at 17 to 570 ppm, whereas no methane above 5
ppm is detected in the normal gravity samples. Also, propene is present in the microgravity samples at
12 to 107 ppm, and it is not detected (limit

= 0.2 ppm) in the normal gravity ones. Other products (e.g.,

2-propanol) are detected in the microgravity samples and are undetected, or weakly detected, in the
normal-gravity samples.

111. DISCUSSION
A. Heat Losses
That heat losses are an important factor in the smolder propagation for the present experimental
conditions in microgravity as well as normal gravity is somewhat unexpected and specific to the smolder
(not flaming) combustion process. Since air has such a low thermal conductivity and mass diffusivity,
one would expect that with the absence of natural convection in microgravity, the heat losses to the
environment would be small and that the deterrent to the progress of the reaction would be a small
supply of oxidizer to the reaction zone.
However, these concepts are somewhat modified by the fact that the smolder process is very
slow, and consequently, the characteristic time for smolder propagation can be significantly smaller than

618

that for diffusion of heat and mass. With a thermal diffusivity for air of 5 ~ 1 0 m2/s and a characteristic
'~
length of 25 mm (based on the foam radius), the characteristic times for heat and mass diffusion are of
the order of 12.5 seconds (Lewis number assumed unity), which is relatively small compared with the
characteristic time of smolder propagation, which with a smolder velocity of 0.05 mmls and a
characteristic sample length of 25 mm is of the order of 500 seconds. The diffusive time scale agrees
well with the experimental time scales for cooling after the igniter is deactivated. Thus, from the point of
view of transport of mass and heat, the smolder reaction is basically stationary and there is ample time
for the heat and mass to diffuse to and from the reaction zone.

If the sample size is small, as it is in this case, the percentage of the heat generated by the
smolder reaction that is transferred by conduction to the surroundings becomes increasingly significant
as the smolder propagates away from the igniter and the contribution of the external heat source (igniter)
is diminished. When the percentage of heat generated by smolder becomes insufficient to overcome the
heat losses due to conduction, the smolder reaction weakens and extinguishes. Under these conditions,
the smolder process is very sensitive to heat losses, and consequently controlled by heat transfer
processes (Torero, et al.4). The oxidizer and combustion products have enough time to be transported in
and out of the reaction zone at their corresponding diffusion rates which, although small, should be
sufficient to support at least a weak smolder reaction. If the sample size were increased, however, and
the ratio of heat losses to heat generation decreases, the smolder process would becomes increasingly
controlled by the supply of oxidizer, and it may reach the point that diffusion of oxidizer may not be
sufficient to sustain the reaction.
B. Mass Transfer

Because of the similarity in the temperature fields and the extent of the char patterns, it is
surprising that such dramatic differences in the combustion products are noted. The key to understanding
this may be in the flow fields in microgravity as compared to normal gravity. In the absence of buoyant
convection, the flow is strictly due to the fan, when it is activated. Due to the relative pressure drops in
the annulus around the foam and through the foam, most of the air flow is believed to travel around the
perimeter of the foam except near the ends of the foam when the two pressure drops become
comparable. Significant flow through the foam end in microgravity is observed via the tarring in
microgravity Run 2, which supports this flow analysis.
of
If the flow in microgravity is primarily annular except as noted above, then the primary SOUM
mass transport within the central region of the foam is diffusion. This would provide longer residence
times in the reaction zone for the heavy fuel fractions, and may result in a higher degree of fuel cracking.
In normal gravity, the local buoyant flows generated within the foam results in shorter residence times in

619

the reaction zone, and thus in fewer cracked fuel components and a greater degree of recondensation of
heavy fuels on the pyrolyzing fuel.
CONCLUSIONS

The present experiments, although limited in fuel sample size and igniter power, provided
valuable information about the smolder characteristics of a porous polymeric fuel in microgravity. The
following conclusions can be drawn from these preliminary tests.

(1) Temperatures in microgravity were in general similar to those measured in normal gravity, with only
a slight increase in microgravity temperatures noted in the quiescent test, where convective losses
are effectively eliminated. The effect of the fan as a source of convective cooling is clearly noted in
microgravity, and provides cooling of similar magnitude as normal gravity natural convection.
(2) Char patterns were also similar between normal and microgravity samples, with the effect of
gravitational orientation having a minor effect on the char patterns. The major differences note were

1) the char was more uniform and fibrous in microgravity as compared with the irregular voids found
in the char from normal gravity; and 2) significant deposits of tar were discovered at the fan end of
the sample from run 2.0. This indicates the presence of the flow through the foam end, which
presumably enhanced the deposition of the tars in this region.

(3) Under the present conditions of fuel size and external heating, the smolder process was in a "weak"
regime because the heat losses from the reaction zone were significant in comparison to the heat
generated by the reaction. Under these conditions, smolder was primarily limited by heat losses
from the reaction to the surrounding environment. This is in contrast to the short-duration aircraft
tests which indicated that the oxygen supply was the controlling mechanism for larger samples. It
remains to be demonstrated which mechanism is truly controlling when both extended microgravity
periods and large sample sizes are available.
(4)

Despite similar temperatures and visible extent of smolder, significant production of light
combustion gases was found to have occurred in microgravity, possibly due to the longer residence
times in microgravity due to the absence of natural convection. Of particular note, the microgravity
levels of carbon monoxide were orders of magnitude higher than that observed in the normal-gravity
tests. This may be a specific result of smoldering in a microgravity environment, which would imply
that microgravity smolder products may be more toxic than smolder products produced on Earth.

620

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of the many NASA personnel that made
this space experiment possible. In particular, we would like to thank the Toxicology Branch of NASA
Johnson, who conducted the gas analyses, specifically John F. Boyd, Millie P. Martin, Lily Y. Wang, Tom
Linero, and John James. We would like to thank the USML-1 crew for their design suggestions and for
their hard work during experiment training and simulations. Special thanks go to Col. Carl J. Meade and
Dr. Lawrence J. DeLucas for their interest and dedication while conducting the experiments during the
USML-1 mission.

REFERENCES
1. Ohlemiller, T.J., Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 1 , 277,1986.
1
2. Drysdale, D., An Introduction to Fire Dynamics, p. 265, John Wiley,l987.
3. Torero, J.L., Buoyancy Effects on Smoldering Combustion of Polyurethane Foam, Ph.D. Thesis,
University of California, Berkeley, 1992.

4. Torero, J.L., Kitano, M. and Femandez-Pello, A.C., Combust. Sci. Tech., 91, 1-3, 95,1993.
5. Dosanjh, S.S., Peterson, J., Femandez-Pello, A.C., and Pagni, P.J., Acta Astronautica, 13, No.
11/22, 689,1987.
6. Cantwell, E., and Fernandez-Pello, A.C., 28th Aerospace Science Meeting, paper #
AIAA-90-0648,1990.
7. Cantwell, E. and Femandez-Pello, A.C, Smoldering Combustion Under Low Gravw CondRions, 1990
Fall Meeting, WSS/CI, San Diego, CA., 1990.

a. Torero, J.L., Femandez-Pello, A.C., and Urban D., Experimental Observations ofthe €fled of
Gravify on Smoldering Combustion, submitted to the AIAA Journal. Also paper # AIAA-93-0829,31st
Aerospace Science Meeting, Reno, NV, 1993.

9. Glassman, I., Combustion, Academic Press, 63,1987.

621

TABLE I: TEST CONDITIONS

TABLE II: THERMOCOUPLE POSITIONS
AXIAL IGNITER (1.x AND 2.x)
Position (mm)
TC

1
2

3
4
5

622

Radial
(from axis)
2 (at igniter)
10
15
20

5

I

Axial
(from fan end)

50
45

40
35
2

TABLE 111: ANALYSIS OF THE POST-COMBUSTION GAS SAMPLES

!

Normal-Gravity

Microgravity

Compound
1.o

I 4.0

1.1

2.1

3.1

4.1

I 21%

20%

7400

20%
79%
ND
ND
Trace
3300

79%
ND
ND
5.5
3800

107
117
47.7
7.91
19.0
70.7

120%
78%
ND
180
610
10700
43.8
85.1
40.9
ND
13.2
49.7

20%
79%
ND
ND

15.2
6.33
25.8
ND
6.08
63.5

-:

I 3.0

119%

2300

ND:
Trace:

1 2.0

21%
78%
ND
17
e9

79%

40
570

3900

78%
ND
96

150
7600
12.1
36.4
4.89

ND
0.18
70.3

4.0
2100

-

120
41
13
3.7
46

79%
NO
NO
T M
3ooo

20%

-

-

-

66

66

150

18
4.4
1.o
26

13
ND
0.83
44

26

9.1
3.7
46

Notdetectd;
Amountdetec
Not raported in anaWi.

623

Figure 1 Flight Hardware assembled for a test with an axial igniter

624

400

300
200

100
0
Time, Minutes

Figure 2 Temperature data from Runs 1.O and 1.l; off); Thermocouples 1 to 4.
(Fan

300
200
100

’

0

0

2

4

6

-

20

Time, Minutes

Figure 3 Temperature data from Runs 2.0 and 2.1 (Fan on); Thermocouples 1 to 4.

625

0

400

El00
Q)
I
-

n

" 0 1

Figure 4 Igniter Temperature Comparison.

626

2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Time, Minutes

Figure 5 Foam Samples, from Runs 1.O (Left) and 2.0 (Right), Fan end at base of figure. Samples are 8
cm long.

627

.. .

Figure 6 Foam Samples, from Runs 1.1 (Top) and 2.1 (Bottom), Fan end at left, Gravity Vector down.
Samples are 8 cm long.

628

Discussion
(Speaker: Carlos Femandez-Pello, University of California, Berkeley, California)
Question: When you see a lot of CO produced in a reaction that under other conditions does not

produce a lot of CO, my naive view is that somehow I have limited the amount of oxygen getting to this
combustionp c e s s , and that is why I don't go to completion in that reaction. Is that consistent with your
interpretation of these results?
Answer: Yes. Basically I think what happens is the supply of oxidizer is by diffusion and what we have in

microgravity is we have a higher temperature, with higher pyrolysis of the fuel, and an attempt to react
more than in normal gravity. We are comparing normal and microgravity. In normal gravity the
convective flow cools the reaction and prevents this from occurring, but in microgravity there is not
enough oxidizer to oxidize the CO to C02. One thing that is a bit deceiving, also, is that this is a surface
reaction, so when we think of the oxidation process in the gas phase, that occurs at above 1000°C. Here,
in the experiment, the temperatures are of the order of 4OO0C, so the concepts that apply to the oxidation
process in flames do not apply here. But basically you are right.

629

