NASA/TM—2003-212216

Radiative Heat Loss Measurements During
Microgravity Droplet Combustion in a
Slow Convective Flow

Michael C. Hicks
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Nathan Kaib, John Easton, and Vedha Nayagam
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
Forman A. Williams
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California

March 2003

The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to
the advancement of aeronautics and space
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part
in helping NASA maintain this important role.

•

CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
papers from scientific and technical
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
NASA.

The NASA STI Program Office is operated by
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for
NASA’s scientific and technical information. The
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’s institutional
mechanism for disseminating the results of its
research and development activities. These results
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report
Series, which includes the following report types:

•

SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
technical, or historical information from
NASA programs, projects, and missions,
often concerned with subjects having
substantial public interest.

•

TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. Englishlanguage translations of foreign scientific
and technical material pertinent to NASA’s
mission.

•

•

•

TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major significant
phase of research that present the results of
NASA programs and include extensive data
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
of significant scientific and technical data and
information deemed to be of continuing
reference value. NASA’s counterpart of peerreviewed formal professional papers but
has less stringent limitations on manuscript
length and extent of graphic presentations.
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
reports, working papers, and bibliographies
that contain minimal annotation. Does not
contain extensive analysis.
CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.

Specialized services that complement the STI
Program Office’s diverse offerings include
creating custom thesauri, building customized
databases, organizing and publishing research
results . . . even providing videos.
For more information about the NASA STI
Program Office, see the following:
•

Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
at http://www.sti.nasa.gov

•

E-mail your question via the Internet to
help@sti.nasa.gov

•

Fax your question to the NASA Access
Help Desk at 301–621–0134

•

Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
301–621–0390

•

Write to:
NASA Access Help Desk
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

NASA/TM—2003-212216

Radiative Heat Loss Measurements During
Microgravity Droplet Combustion in a
Slow Convective Flow

Michael C. Hicks
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Nathan Kaib, John Easton, and Vedha Nayagam
National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio
Forman A. Williams
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California

Prepared for the
Third Joint Meeting of the U.S. Sections of the Combustion Institute
sponsored by The Combustion Institute
Chicago, Illinois, March 16–19, 2003

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center

March 2003

Acknowledgments

This research is sponsored by the NASA Microgravity Combustion Science Program. Particular appreciation is
extended to Ms. Jennifer Neale for conducting the ZGF experiments and the data reduction and to Rodger Slutz,
Mike Brace, Hank Kacher, and Dale Robinson for the design and buildup of the experimental test rigs
used in the drop towers.

This report contains preliminary
findings, subject to revision as
analysis proceeds.

Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22100

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov

Radiative Heat Loss Measurements during Microgravity Droplet
Combustion in a Slow Convective Flow
M. C. Hicks*
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
N. Kaib, J. Easton, V. Nayagam
National Center of Microgravity Research
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
F. A. Williams
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, California 92093
Abstract
Radiative heat loss from burning droplets in a slow convective flow under microgravity conditions is measured using a
broad-band (0.6 to 40 mm) radiometer. In addition, backlit images of the droplet as well as color images of the flame
were obtained using CCD cameras to estimate the burning rates and the flame dimensions, respectively. Tests were
carried out in air at atmospheric pressure using n-heptane and methanol fuels with imposed forced flow velocities varied
from 0 cm/sec to 10 cm/s and initial droplet diameters varied from 1 mm to 3 mm. Slow convective flows were
generated using three different experimental configurations in three different facilities in preparation for the proposed
International Space Station droplet experiments. In the 2.2 Second Drop-Tower Facility a droplet supported on the
leading edge of a quartz fiber is placed within a flow tunnel supplied by compressed air. In the Zero-Gravity Facility
(five-second drop tower) a tethered droplet is translated in a quiescent ambient atmosphere to establish a uniform flow
field around the droplet. In the KC-135 aircraft an electric fan was used to draw a uniform flow past a tethered droplet.
Experimental results show that the burn rate increases and the overall flame size decreases with increases in forced-flow
velocities over the range of flow velocities and droplet sizes tested. The total radiative heat loss rate, Qr, decreases as the
imposed flow velocity increases with the spherically symmetric combustion having the highest values. These
observations are in contrast to the trends observed for gas-jet flames in microgravity, but consistent with the observations
during flame spread over solid fuels where the burning rate is coupled to the forced flow as here.
It has been shown that the ratio of the radiative heat
loss to the total heat release from spherically symmetric
droplet combustion can vary from 10% to 70% with
initial droplet diameters ranging from 1 mm to 5 mm [1].
It was also shown in an earlier study that the transfer of
radiant energy into the droplet was not as significant as
the radiative heat loss to the surroundings [2]. This effect
has been indirectly observed in previous experiments
where it was noted that droplet burn rates decrease with
increasing initial droplet diameters [3, 4] due to gas-phase
radiative heat losses. This is a direct consequence of the
relationship, just derived, between fractional radiative
heat loss and droplet diameter.
It still remains to be determined that gas phase
radiative losses have a significant impact when a large
droplet is exposed to a convective flow field in

Introduction
The classical theory of droplet combustion predicts
that the chemical heat release rate, Qrel is proportional to
the instantaneous droplet diameter dl(t). Furthermore, the
quasi-steady model predicts that the ratio of the flame
diameter to droplet diameter is a constant. It then follows
that the radiative heat loss rate, Qrad, which is proportional
to the emitting-gas volume, varies as the cube of droplet
diameter. Combining these results, the radiative heat loss,
as a fraction of the total heat release, becomes
proportional to the droplet diameter squared
(i.e., Qrad / Qrel ∂ dl(t)2 ) [1]. Consequently, as the droplet
diameter increases the radiative heat losses from the gas
phase become increasingly important as a heat-loss
mechanism.

*

Corresponding author: Michael.C.Hicks@nasa.gov

NASA/TM—2003-212216

1

concept similar to the 2.2 Sec DTF. However, rather than
using pressurized bottles of gas with a sonic orifice, a fan
was used to generate the required flows. In this test
configuration only two flow velocities were used (i.e.,
5 cm/s and 10 cm/s), and the initial droplet diameters
were considerably larger at approximately 3 mm. Each
of these test configurations are discussed in greater detail
in the subsections that follow.

microgravity. There has been little work showing the
effects that a slow convective flow field will have on the
radiative heat loss from a large droplet burning in
microgravity.
Specific Objectives
The previous studies all pertained to droplet
combustion employing a spherically symmetric flame
configuration. Except for a study reporting flame
radiation measurements from a 2-dimensional gas-jet
diffusion flame [6] there is little in current literature
which one could extrapolate to droplet combustion in
slow convective flows. It would be expected, as was
found in the gas-jet diffusion-flame study, that a change
in the dominant mode of heat transfer would occur as a
convective flow field is established (either by buoyant
forces or with a forced-convective flow). The effects of
gas-phase radiative losses on large droplet flame shapes
and burn rates in a very slow convective flow field remain
to be fully quantified. The specific objective of this work
is to report gas-phase radiation measurements for an
axisymmetric flame configuration established by large
droplets burning in microgravity under the influence of a
slow convective flow. The range of initial droplet
diameters was from 0.8 mm to 3.4 mm, and the velocity
range of the flow field was from 0 cm/s to 10 cm/s.
Results from this work will support on-going
development of analytical and numerical models and
increase the general understanding of the role that
gas-phase radiation plays in droplet combustion,
particularly as it occurs in slow convective flows.
Additionally, this work was part of a developmental effort
for a future investigation scheduled to fly on the
International Space Station. As such, in order to address
the full range of droplet diameters and flow conditions
that are to be studied in that flight program, it was
necessary to use three different experimental platforms.

2.2-Second Drop-Tower Test Configuration:
The
flow tunnel is capable of producing uniform forced flow
velocities ranging from 0 cm/s to 20 cm/s within a
cylindrical combustion chamber of cross-sectional area
314 cm2 and height 100 cm. Gas flow through the
chamber is established by actuating a solenoid valve to
open the gas line from a pressurized gas bottle to the
chamber. A pressure regulator, located upstream of a
sonic orifice, is used to control flow velocities inside the
chamber. A specially designed insert was built to be
accommodated within the combustion chamber. The
insert consisted of a 100 mm quartz fiber with a 200 mm
bead at its tip, a fuel syringe equipped with a hypodermic
needle to deposit the fuel droplet on the bead, a stepper
motor used to discharge the fuel from the syringe, and a
hot-wire igniter which is removed from the field of view
by activating a solenoid. The time-synchronized
operations of the flow tunnel, the fuel syringe motor, and
the igniter are controlled by a programmable on-board
microprocessor. The flow uniformity was checked with
the insert in place using a hot-wire anemometer and was
found to vary no more than ± 0.5 cm/s at a flow rate of
10 cm/s. Prior to each test the flow field was allowed to
reach steady conditions (a period of about 10 s), followed
by the formation of a droplet of desired size on the
support-fiber bead, and then the experimental package
was dropped. During the drop a backlit image of the
droplet was obtained using a color CCD camera at 30
frames per second. The back-lighting intensity was
adjusted such that the formation of the soot shell was
visible in the droplet image. A second color CCD
camera, with a larger field of view, was used to record the
flame images. Also, two wide-band (0.6 to 40 mm)
radiometers recorded the radiant emission from the
burning droplet flame. Both of these radiometers were
situated so that the fuel droplet was centered in the view
cone (which had a solid angle of 64±) and so that the
flame would be viewed at an angle roughly perpendicular
to the axis of symmetry. The first radiometer was a
thin-film thermopile detector (Dexter model 2M) with an
85 ms time constant, and the second radiometer was a
silicon-based thermopile detector (Dexter model S60)
with a 12 ms time constant. The distance from the
radiometers to the droplet center was nominally 9.0 cm.

Experiments
As mentioned, three separate test configurations were
used in obtaining the radiometric measurements reported
in this paper. The first test configuration, which was used
in the 2.2 Second Drop-Tower Facility ( “2.2 Sec DTF ” ),
employed a “flow tunnel”, powered by a pressurized gas
bottle, to establish a uniform flow field around a burning
droplet with an initial diameter of approximately 1.2 mm.
The second test configuration, designed for use in the
Zero-Gravity Facility ( “ZGF”, i.e., the larger drop tower
providing up to 5 seconds of microgravity), utilized a
translating mechanism to move the droplet at very precise
velocities through a quiescent medium to generate a
uniform flow field. The velocities for this system ranged
from 0 cm/s to 3 cm/s, and initial droplet diameters were
nominally 2.3 mm. The third test configuration was
designed to fly on the KC-135, which affords over 20
seconds of microgravity, and it employed a flow-tunnel

NASA/TM—2003-212216

Zero-Gravity Facility Test Configuration:
In the
second test configuration, a tethered droplet was moved

2

with a translating device through a quiescent atmosphere
in order to obtain the desired flows.
As with the
2.2-Sec DTF experiments, these tests took place in an
enclosed cylindrical combustion chamber pressurized to
1.0 atmosphere. The droplet was supported by a 125 mm
quartz fiber which in this case was supported at both ends
in a specially designed fiber-support fixture. A 200 mm
diameter bead was placed at the fiber’s midpoint to pin
the droplet in the center of the cameras’ field of view, and
the fiber was translated such that it was perpendicular to
the droplet motion.
The test sequence began by dispensing the droplet
onto the bead. Once the droplet was formed the test rig
was released, the igniter was energized and the droplet
was ignited. Ignition typically occurred approximately a
second after free-fall was initiated.
The same
radiometers, as discussed in the preceding section, were
used, and their placements, relative to the droplet
location, were essentially the same as in the 2.2 Sec DTF.
Once the droplet was ignited, the fiber mount was
accelerated at a rate of 10 cm/s2 until the desired carriage
velocity was achieved. The velocities of the translating
device were calibrated several times and were found to
have uncertainties of less than 1%.
Again, the
synchronization of the droplet dispensing, ignition, and
translation was controlled by an onboard microprocessor.
Remote camera heads along with the radiometers were
mounted onto the same translating stage on which the
droplet fiber support was mounted so that there was no
relative motion between the droplet, cameras, and
radiometer.

Figure 1 Flow orientation relative to the axis of the
droplet support fiber for each test configuration and
definition of flame dimensions.

in the first two test configurations and for only n-heptane
in the KC-135 experiments. All radiometers used in the
testing were calibrated with a blackbody source at the
same distances from the droplet support fiber employed in
the experimental rig.
Results and Discussion
The instantaneous radiated heat loss, Qrad, is calculated
by multiplying the radiative flux obtained from the
calibrated radiometer, qr , by an effective spherical surface
determined by the distance, L , that the radiometers are
located from the droplet center. In the presence of a
convective flow field flame shapes will actually be
ellipsoidal with the degree of ellipticity dependent, among
other things, on the strength of the flow field. The
approach used to calculate radiative losses simply
assumes a spherically symmetric flame shape. For
qualitative purposes, where trends are being identified,
this simplification should not significantly alter the
conclusions.
Figure 2 shows the instantaneous radiative heat loss,
Qrad, as a fraction of the maximum radiative heat loss,
Qmax, as measured over the duration of the droplet’s burn
time for n-heptane (Figure 2a) and methanol (Figure 2b)
at two different flow velocities; 0 cm/s and 5 cm/s for the
n-heptane test and 0 cm/s and 4 cm/s for the methanol
test. Initial droplet diameters for the two n-heptane tests
were the same and for the two methanol tests were within
20%. These two tests are typical of other similar tests
performed and have been highlighted here to illustrate the
effect that a small flow velocity has on radiative heat
losses. In both cases, as would be expected, the burn rates
(as seen by the slope of the droplet regression) increase
with flow velocity.
Of particular interest is the
observation that, for each fuel type, the maximum
radiative heat loss occurring during the experimental time

KC-135 Test Configuration: The third test
configuration used existing hardware originally designed
to support the earlier Fiber-Supported Droplet
Combustion experiments [7]. This test configuration was
used on the NASA KC-135 Reduced-Gravity Research
Aircraft which provides reduced gravity levels up to 10-3
g’s for periods of 20 to 30 seconds. Tests were run with
n-heptane droplets approximately 2.5 mm to 3 mm in
initial diameter, with cabin pressures at a nominal
0.7 atmospheres and with two flow velocities, 5 cm/s and
10 cm/s. The uniform flow field was generated by a fan
and a series of flow straighteners located at one end of the
enclosure. A droplet support fiber, similar to the ones
described in the other test configurations, was aligned so
that it’s axis was parallel with the flow direction. Two
radiometers were used; however, in this test configuration
one of the radiometers (Dexter model 2M) was filtered to
pass only the water line emissions at 6.3 mm (with a band
pass of 5.1 mm to 7.5 mm).
Comparisons of Test Configurations: The orientation
of the support fiber relative to the flow was different for
each test configuration, and these are presented in
Figure 1. Tests were run for both n-heptane and methanol

NASA/TM—2003-212216

3

n-heptane ; dl(0) = 2.3 mm

is reached at a faster rate as the flow velocity is increased.
In fact, for the n-heptane test a peak in the radiative heat
loss is never reached when there is no flow, while for the
case with flow (U∞ = 5 cm/s) a peak in the radiative heat
loss is quickly reached. This trend is also observed with
the methanol tests where the radiative loss reaches a peak
sooner in the case with flow (4 cm/s) as compared with
the no-flow case. In comparing the methanol tests with
the n-heptane tests the peak radiative losses are reached in
approximately half the time. This is a result of the
inherent difference between the fuels where methanol,
having a lower carbon content, reaches a stoichiometric
balance with O2 much faster. Consequently flames are
located closer to the droplet surface and flame transients
dissipate at faster rates. Convective flow effects on
radiative losses are observed for both fuels. Two flame
dimensions (as defined in Figure 1), the standoff distance,
S, and the flame width, W, as ratios to the instantaneous
droplet diameter, dl(t), are also plotted.
It is apparent from these plots that when forced
convection is present the outer transient-diffusive region
is reduced in size and the flame reaches its quasi-steady
behavior sooner, leading to an earlier peak in radiative
heat loss. Moreover, the radiative heat loss decays from
its peak value quicker due to the increased burning rate
with convective flow.
A unique feature of the test rig used in the ZGF is that,
because the droplet is translated in a quiescent
environment, it can be programmed to accelerate (or
decelerate) the translational velocity in order to change
the flow around the droplet in a prescribed manner. A test
was performed, taking advantage of this feature, to
investigate unsteady-flow effects on radiative heat losses
from the gas phase. Since most practical situations
involving droplet combustion include flow transients in
the form of droplet acceleration/deceleration, these
comparative tests have particular merit. In these tests
radiative losses were measured from two n-heptane
droplets (approximately the same size) with the same
starting flow velocities. In each case the droplets reached
their maximum velocities, at 3 cm/s, within
approximately 0.3 seconds into the drop. Immediately
after attaining maximum velocity one of the droplets was
slowly decelerated at an average rate of 0.4 cm/s2 while
the other droplet was held at a constant velocity of
3.0 cm/s.
Figure 3a shows a plot of the instantaneous radiative
heat loss, Qrad, and the instantaneous Reynolds number,
Re, (using the droplet translation velocity, U∞(t), the
instantaneous droplet diameter, dl(t) and the kinematic
viscosity evaluated at 850°C ). Figure 3b shows the
transient behavior of the flame dimensions, S and W,
normalized by the droplet diameter, the droplet diameter
squared, dl(t)2, and the deceleration profile that was
programmed into the stepper motor controlling the
translation velocity. In both the steady and decelerating

U = 5 cm/s

1.0

10

Qrad/Qmax ; (dl(t)/dl(0))2

Qrad /Qmax
8
0.9

(dl(t)/dl(0))

2
6

W/dl(t)
0.8

4

S/dl(t)

0.7

W/dl(t) ; S/dl(t)

2

0.6

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

t (s)
(a)
methanol
U = 0 cm/s
dl(0) = 1.5 mm

U = 4 cm/s
dl(0) = 1.2 mm

Qrad/Qmax ; (dl(t)/dl(0))2

1.0

10

Qrad /Qmax

8

(dl(t)/do)2

0.8

6
0.6

W/dl(t)

4

0.4

W/dl(t) ; S/dl(t)

NASA/TM—2003-212216

U = 0 cm/s

2

S/dl(t)

0

0.2
0.0

0.5

secs

1.0

1.5

2.0

t (s)
(b)

Figure 2 Radiative heat loss as a fraction of maximum radiative
heat loss, Qrad/Qmax; droplet diameter over initial droplet diameter
squared, (dl(t)/dl(0))2; ratio of flame width to droplet diameter,
W/dl(t), and ratio of flame stand-off distance to droplet diameter,
S/dl(t), for (a) n-heptane droplet at 0 cm/s and 5 cm/s and (b) for
methanol droplet at 0 cm/s and 4 cm/s ambient flow velocities.

cases (as observed in Figure 3b) the flame continues to
move away gradually from the droplet with the
decelerating droplet showing a slightly faster rate of
non-dimensional flame expansion. Interestingly, during
this same period the decelerating droplet has a slightly

4

n-heptane

lower radiative heat loss. Since a large portion of the
measured radiation is from soot it is possible this is a
soot-induced effect. This may reflect the relatively long
time delays in re-establishing the soot field following a
disturbance to the flow field which alters the rate at which
fuel can be supplied to form soot. As this droplet’s
deceleration rate approaches zero, at the end of the
experiment, a velocity of 2 cm/s is reached. During this
near-steady velocity phase at the end of the test it appears
that the instantaneous radiative loss begins to increase,
almost overtaking the droplet having a steady velocity at
3 cm/s. The decelerated flow field allows the flame to
temporarily expand. Since it takes a finite amount of time
to re-establish an equilibrium flame position after a flow
field is altered, the flame’s intensity is momentarily
weakened. Additional work in this area is necessary in
order to understand better the effects unsteady flow fields
have on axisymmetric droplet combustion.
Results of a number of tests, with ambient flow
velocities ranging from 0 cm/s to 10 cm/s, are presented
in Figure 4. The instantaneous radiative heat loss, Qrad, is
plotted against instantaneous droplet diameter. Average
initial droplet diameters were 1.25 mm for the 2 Sec DTF,
2.31 mm for the ZGF, and 3.3 mm for the KC-135. The
aggregate plot, showing all results on the same droplet
scale, indicate that once the flame transient passes there is
an expected convergence in radiative heat loss. It is
apparent that tests performed in the ZGF never extended
beyond the flame transient where flame expansion
relative to the droplet diameter reached a maximum. This
is due to the relatively large initial droplet diameters used
in these tests and the commensurately short burn time
allowed in this facility (i.e., data begins approximately 3
seconds after 0-g ignition and steady velocity was
reached). The considerably smaller droplets used in the 2
Sec DTF, coupled with the fact that the drop occurred
after ignition, allowed these tests to proceed beyond the
flame-expansion period. When results from these tests
are plotted separately on a larger scale (i.e., shown in
lower plot of Figure 4) an interesting observation can be
made concerning the relationship between radiative heat
losses and flow velocity. Results indicate that radiative
losses tend to decrease as the flow velocity is increased.
Additionally, although less accurate due to disturbances in
the micro-gravity levels (i.e., “g-jitter” effects), the
KC-135 results (shown in upper plot of Figure 4) suggest
this same trend. One possible explanation is that the
flame shape becomes increasingly distorted into an
ellipsoidal shape with increased flow. The distorted
flame shape results in a smaller radiating volume and this,
coupled with an increase in convective losses as hot gases
are swept downstream, causes a decrease in radiative
output from the gas phase. In addition, decreases in soot
radiation resulting from shorter soot residence times due
to increased convective effects, also contribute to the
observed decrease in radiative output.

U = 3 cm/s

Dl(0) = 2.3 mm

Dl(0) = 2.4 mm

2.0

13
1.5

Qrad (watts)

12
11

1.0

Re

10
9

0.5

8
0.0
3.0

7
0.0

0.8 cm/s 2

6

W/dl(t) , S/dl(t) ; - dU∞ / dt (cm/s2)

1.0

2.0

t (s)
(a)

0.15 cm/s 2

0.3 cm/s 2

10

8

S/dl(t)
4

6

4

W/dl(t)

2

(dl(t))2

NASA/TM—2003-212216

U = 3 cm/s ==> 2 cm/s
14

2

- dU∞ / dt
0
0.0

1.0

t (s)
(b)

2.0

0
3.0

Figure 3 Comparison of (a) radiative heat loss, Qrad, and Reynolds
number, Re, and (b) ratios of flame width, W, and flame standoff,
S, over droplet diameter, dl(t), and droplet diameter squared, dl(t)2,
for a steady flow at 3 cm/s and a decelerating flow from 3 cm/s to
2 cm/s (average deceleration rate, -dU∞/dt, at - 0.4 cm/s2 ).

Conclusions
Gas phase radiation measurements of axisymmetric
flame configurations resulting from large n-heptane and
methanol droplets (0.8 mm to 3.4 mm diameters) burning
in a slow convective flow field were obtained from
experiments performed in three different microgravity
facilities; the 2 Second Drop Tower Facility, the Zero
Gravity Facility (“ZGF”, providing up to 5 seconds of
microgravity) and the KC-135 (providing up to 20
seconds of microgravity). Imposed uniform flow

5

n-heptane
40

U = 0 - 2 cm/s

U = 3 - 7 cm/s

Qrad (Watts)

30

the flow field was decelerated during the droplet’s burn.
Results from this comparison test show that a decelerating
flow field initially causes reduction in the radiative loss
from the gas phase. Additional tests with this feature are
warranted in order to obtain a clearer understanding of
this phenomenon.

U = 8 - 10 cm/s

KC-135
ZGF

2 Sec DTF

20

References
1. Marchese, A. J., and Dryer, F. L., Combust. Sci.
Tech. 124:371-402 (1997)
2. Saitoh, T., Yamakzaki, K., and Viskanta, R., Journal
of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, 7:1, (1993).
3. Colantonio, R. O., Nayagam, V., Technical Meeting
of the Central States Section of the Combustion
Institute, 1997.
4. Aharon, I. and Shaw, B.D., Microgravity Science
Tecnhology, X/2, (1997).
5. Atreya, A. and Agrawal, S., Combustion and Flame,
The Combustion Institute, 115:372-382 (1998).
6. Bahadori, M.Y., Stocker, D.P., Zhou, L., and Hegde,
U., Combustion Science Technology, 2001, Vol 167,
pp 169-186.
7. Dietrich, D.L.,
Haggard, J.B.,
Dryer, F.L.,
Nayagam, V., Shaw, B.D., Williams, F.A., TwentySixth Symposium (International) on Combustion/ The
Combustion Institute, 1996, pp. 1201-1207.

10

0
0

1

dl(t) mm

2

3

9

Qrad (Watts)

7

2 Sec DTF

5

3

1
0.25

0.5

0.75

1

1.25

1.5

dl(t) mm
Figure 4 Summary of tests with n-heptane droplets from three
test configurations (i) the 2 Sec DTF (dl (0) = 0.8 mm - 1.5 mm),
(ii) the ZGF dl (0) = 2.0 mm - 2.5 mm), and (iii) the KC-135
(dl (0) = 3.1mm - 3.4 mm).

velocities ranging from 0 cm/sec to 10 cm/sec were
established in different manners in each of the test
configurations. A unique feature of the experimental
hardware used in the ZGF allows for experiments to be
conducted in precisely controlled accelerating and
decelerating flow fields.
Results from each of the test configurations show that
radiative heat losses from the gas phase contribute to a
substantial portion of the overall heat loss mechanism.
Preliminary results suggest that gas phase radiative heat
losses reach their maximum values at a faster rate and
approach a lower quasi-steady asymptotic value as flow
velocities are increased. It is believed that this is a result
of the combined effects of increased droplet vaporization
rates coupled with flame distortions and alterations in the
soot distribution (in the case of n-heptane) resulting from
the imposed flow fields. An interesting comparison of
similar-sized droplets with the same initial conditions was
made using the unique feature of the ZGF test rig where

NASA/TM—2003-212216

6

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)

2. REPORT DATE

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

Technical Memorandum

March 2003
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5. FUNDING NUMBERS

Radiative Heat Loss Measurements During Microgravity Droplet Combustion in a
Slow Convective Flow

WBS–22–101–32–09

6. AUTHOR(S)

Michael C. Hicks, Nathan Kaib, John Easton, Vedha Nayagam,
and Forman A. Williams
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 – 3191

E–13837

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20546– 0001

NASA TM—2003-212216

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

Prepared for the Third Joint Meeting of the U.S. Sections of the Combustion Institute sponsored by The Combustion
Institute, March 16–19, 2003. Michael C. Hicks, NASA Glenn Research Center; Nathan Kaib, John Easton, and
Vedha Nayagam, National Center for Microgravity Research, Cleveland, Ohio 44135; Forman A. Williams, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093. Responsible person, Michael C. Hicks, organization code 6711,
216–433–6576.
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Unclassified - Unlimited
Subject Category: 88

12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE

Distribution: Nonstandard

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301–621–0390.
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)

Radiative heat loss from burning droplets in a slow convective flow under microgravity conditions is measured using a broad-band
(0.6 to 40 µm) radiometer. In addition, backlit images of the droplet as well as color images of the flame were obtained using CCD
cameras to estimate the burning rates and the flame dimensions, respectively. Tests were carried out in air at atmospheric pressure using
n-heptane and methanol fuels with imposed forced flow velocities varied from 0 to 10 cm/s and initial droplet diameters varied from
1 to 3 mm. Slow convective flows were generated using three different experimental configurations in three different facilities in
preparation for the proposed International Space Station droplet experiments. In the 2.2 Second Drop-Tower Facility a droplet supported on the leading edge of a quartz fiber is placed within a flow tunnel supplied by compressed air. In the Zero-Gravity Facility
(five-second drop tower) a tethered droplet is translated in a quiescent ambient atmosphere to establish a uniform flow field around the
droplet. In the KC–135 aircraft an electric fan was used to draw a uniform flow past a tethered droplet. Experimental results show that
the burn rate increases and the overall flame size decreases with increases in forced-flow velocities over the range of flow velocities and
droplet sizes tested. The total radiative heat loss rate, Qr, decreases as the imposed flow velocity increases with the spherically symmetric combustion having the highest values. These observations are in contrast to the trends observed for gas-jet flames in microgravity,
but consistent with the observations during flame spread over solid fuels where the burning rate is coupled to the forced flow as here.
14. SUBJECT TERMS

15. NUMBER OF PAGES

Burning rate; Combustion; Thermal radiation; Fuel combustion; Microgravity; Drop
towers; Droplet combustion
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF REPORT

Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF THIS PAGE

Unclassified

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
OF ABSTRACT

12
16. PRICE CODE
20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT

Unclassified
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
298-102

