Recent Advances in Science Support for Isolated Droplet Combustion
Experiments
F. L. Dryer, A. Kazakov, B.D. Urban and K. Kroenlein
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544-5263
INTRODUCTION
In a joint program involving Prof. F.A. Williams of the University of California, San Diego
and Dr. V. Nayagam of the National Center for Microgravity Research, the combustion
characteristics of isolated liquid fuel droplets of n-heptane, n-decane, methanol, methanol-water,
ethanol and ethanol-water having initial diameters between about 1 mm and 6 mm continues to
be investigated. The objectives of the work are to improve fundamental knowledge of droplet
combustion dynamics for pure fuels and fuel-water mixtures through microgravity experiments
and theoretical analyses. The Princeton contributions support the engineering design, data
analysis, and data interpretation requirements for the study of initially single component,
spherically symmetric, isolated droplet combustion studies through experiments and numerical
modeling. UCSD contributions are described in a companion communication in this conference.
The Princeton effort also addresses the analyses of Fiber Supported Droplet Combustion (FSDC)
experiments conducted with the above fuels and collaborative work with others who are
investigating droplet combustion in the presence of steady convection. A thorough interpretation
of droplet burning behavior for n-heptane and n-decane over a relatively wide range of
conditions also involves the influences of sooting on the combustion behavior, and this particular
aspect on isolated burning of droplets is under consideration in a collaborative program
underway with Drexel University (M.Y. Choi and collaborators). This collaboration is addressed
in another communication at this conference.
The one-dimensional, time-dependent, numerical modeling approach that we have continued
to evolve for analyzing isolated, quiescent droplet combustion data has been further applied to
investigate several facets of isolated droplet burning of simple alcohols, n-heptane, and n-decane.
Some of the new results are described below.
LIQUID DENSITY EFFECTS ON ETHANOL DROPLET COMBUSTION
In a recent paper, we quantitatively evaluated the effects of thermal expansion and solution
density variations on liquid drop diameter over the burning history of ethanol and ethanol water
droplets [1]. We treated the liquid mass and thermal transport via “effective” empirical transport
corrections (as we previously have done), and additionally considered a radial convective liquid
flow velocity component in the governing equations to assess the importance of variations in the
local liquid-phase density.
We found that the effects of liquid phase density changes are primarily confined to the initial
droplet heat-up period where an increase in droplet diameter due to thermal expansion results in
large negative contributions to the observed rate of droplet diameter change. After the initial
heat-up period is over, the contribution becomes much less important than that from the actual
liquid gasification rate, becoming mildly competitive again near the condition of extinction. At
extinction, the gasification rate ceases while an increase in liquid water content and subsequent
cooling both result in droplet contraction. The observed difference in drop diameters between
cases with and without consideration of liquid density changes is within about 6 %.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

149

Since the effects associated with liquid density changes are confined to a very short initial
period in the overall droplet gasification history, they can be essentially compensated for by
shifting the gasification rate curve. In other words, when plotted against the “extent of burning”
2
coordinate, 1 − (d d 0 ) , the gasification rate curves match within about 2 % during most of the
burning history. The integrated total water mass fraction histories in the liquid phase agree well
within the uncertainty with which this parameter can be determined experimentally.

The analyses show that the liquid phase density terms in the governing equations do not
affect significantly the model results for ethanol droplet combustion. By ignoring these terms,
the numerical stiffness of the computations can be significantly reduced. Once robust droplet
burning is established, there is very little “memory” of the initial transient heat-up period (as
long as the applied ignition energy does not overdrive the process) in the subsequent
computational predictions. All microgravity droplet combustion experiments involve some
asymmetry initially, due to ignition. However, these results support the assumption that
experimental burning histories can still be compared with uni-dimensional model results by
matching the parts of the curves subsequent to the initial heat up period. Nearly all investigators
that have performed microgravity experiments in droptowers and on space platforms have
employed this assumption. It should be stressed that results may be different for pure droplet
vaporization, but certainly the terms in question can be neglected in the analysis of microgravity
experiments in which relative gas phase and droplet velocities are small and one is interested in
burning rate, flame structure and extinction in the robust phases of burning.
TWO-STAGE IGNITION OF n-HEPTANE DROPLETS
Several microgravity studies on the thermal ignition behavior of n-heptane droplets have
appeared, one of the more recent being that of Schnaubelt et al.[2]. Data typically have been
generated by exposing a droplet that was initially at room temperature to a high ambient
temperature within a surrounding “oven”. Two-stage type ignition processes have been
observed, with complex kinetics suggested as the principal source of the behavior. With the
exception of the above work, numerical modeling of the experiments has not utilized reaction
mechanisms that included low-temperature, intermediate-temperature, and high-temperature
kinetics in significant detail. We used our numerical
model with the kinetics of Peters et al. [3] to
investigate the two-stage ignition character of an nheptane droplet immersed in a hot oxidizing
environment.
1.2

600K
650K
700K
750K
800K
850K
900K
950K

2

Regression Rate [mm /s]

1

Figure 1 depicts the calculated thermal ignition
and gasification rate as functions of time for a 0.7mm
n-heptane droplet instantaneously immersed in air
with different far-field gas temperatures from 600950 K. At far-field temperatures higher than 950 K, a
short period of droplet heating and gasification leads
to flaming ignition and the establishment of a high
temperature diffusion flame surrounding the droplet.
The gasification rate of the droplet increases very
rapidly due to heat conducted to the droplet surface.
The vapor formed diffuses away from the surface into

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

150

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

Time [s]

Figure 1 Thermal ignition and combustion of a 0.7 mm
diameter n-heptane droplet in atmospheric pressure air
at different far field (ambient) temperatures.

the surrounding hot gases and begins to react with oxygen, producing localized heating of the
mixture. The localized chemical heat release leads to the occurrence of a flaming ignition. Little
local heat release is needed to drive the local region into explosively fast, chain branched (high
temperature) kinetic behavior within the fuel vapor surrounding the droplet (where oxygen is
also present). The exact region where this occurs is a complex function of temperature, local
equivalence ratio and time. The region of ignition leads to propagation of reaction through the
remaining stratified pre-mixed layer of fuel species and oxidizer and a sharp increase in
gasification rate due to the accompanying rapid heat release. This transitions into the typical
diffusive flame structure observed to be surrounding a burning droplet. Subsequently, a burning
rate above 0.8 mm2/s is achieved. This burning rate is consistent with the combustion of the
same size n-heptane droplet and far-field temperature, but established by the ignition processes
used to emulate spark ignition (as in our previous calculations).
For lower far-field ambient temperatures in air, the period of gasification prior to
establishing a high temperature diffusion flame structure becomes longer. The droplet is
consumed initially with a slower increase in gasification rate with time. As chemical heat release
builds in the gas phase from the vaporized n-heptane diffusing into the surrounding hot oxidizer,
the regression rate increases due to increases in the local gas temperatures nears the drop surface.
This characteristic persists at ambient temperatures between 950 K down to ones approaching
800 K. Note that the 800 K case shows an abrupt change in the gasification rate at about 0.35
seconds, a short time span over which the gasification rate increases very little with time,
followed by a period in which the gasification rate again increases rapidly to that found for
established diffusive burning. This behavior occurs because the portion of the fuel-vapor/air
mixture with conditions that lie in the intermediate and high temperature kinetic regimes at
higher ambient far field temperatures now partially lie within a temperature range characteristic
of negative temperature coefficient (NTC) behavior and the chemical heat release rate available
to modify the temperature profile is reduced. Sufficient heat release eventually exists to drive the
region to temperatures characteristic of the high temperature regime (explosively fast chemistry),
and the remaining system is driven to flaming ignition and a diffusion flame structure the same
as that achieved for initially higher far field temperatures.
The same droplet in ambient air at temperatures from 800 K to approaching 600 K behave
differently that those with either higher or lower far field temperature conditions. As the far field
temperature drops, the characteristic period of the plateau region increases and the heat release
that can occur is lessened to an extent that overall, none of the reacting environment can be
driven into explosively fast chemical kinetic behavior before the droplet has been entirely
consumed. As regions are driven to conditions within the parameter space characterized by NTC
kinetic behavior, the destruction of n-heptane in those regions and heat release rate become very
slow. Some the vaporized fuel in these regions is not consumed over the lifetime of the drop,
even though it is mixed with oxidizer. Thus, although the droplet gasifies completely, a
substantial fraction of the n-heptane vapor formed escapes to the ambient.
Interestingly, when the far-field temperature is reduced below 650K to 600 K, the slowing
of the gasification rate disappears, and the system is driven to explosively fast kinetic behavior
and the same diffusive flame structure found for the high temperature far field conditions again.
In these cases, large regions of the reaction layer surrounding the droplet are at conditions
characteristic of low temperature oxidation kinetics, and the accompanying heat release is so

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

151

rapid and large that conditions are driven through those
characterizing NTC behavior and to explosively fast
kinetic behavior.

1.2
600K
650K
700K
750K
800K
850K
900K
950K

1

2

Regression Rate [mm /s]

A similar parametric study is shown in Fig. 2 for a
larger 1.4 mm diameter n-heptane droplet over the same
range of initial conditions. The size of the droplet
affects the period of droplet heating, its gasification rate
during the initial phases of gasification, the thickness of
the layer of fuel-vapor/oxidizer/intermediate reaction
species surrounding the drop, and its volume relative to
the mass of liquid. In addition the time scale of
relevance (gasification time of the drop) also changes.
As a result the coupling with low, NTC, intermediate,
and high temperature reaction kinetics lead to a Figure 2 Thermal ignition and combustion of a 1.4
n-heptane droplet in
different ignition and burning behavior. Now, no mm diameter at different far fieldatmospheric
(ambient)
pressure air
conditions are evidenced that eventually reach flaming temperatures.
combustion conditions. However, it is clear from
inspection of these curves that, between 700 and 800K, there remains a period over which some
of the regions surrounding the droplet exhibit NTC kinetic behavior, slowing the rate of
gasification by reducing the rate of gas phase chemical heat addition.
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Time [s]

Further calculations are presently underway using a minimized mechanism [4] derived from
the large detailed n-heptane oxidation mechanism published by Curran et al. [5].
REFERENCES
1. A. Kazakov, J.D. Conley and F.L. Dryer, "Detailed Modeling of an Isolated Ethanol Droplet
Combustion under Microgravity Conditions", Combust. Flame, (2003). In Press

2. S. Schnaubelt, O. Mariui, T. Coordes, C. Eigenbrod, and H.J. Rath, Proc. Comb. Ins., 28, 953
(2000).
3. N. Peters, G. Paczko, K. Seiser, and R. Seshadri, Combust Flame, 38, 159 (2002).
4. J. Conley, A. Kazakov, and F.L. Dryer, “Experimental and Numerical Observations on nheptane oxidation: Mechanism Comparisons and Minimization”, presented at the Joint
Spring Sectional Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Chicago, IL, March 2003.
5. H. J. Curran, P. Gaffuri, W. J. Pitz, and C.K. Westbrook, Combust. Flame, 114, 149 (1998).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors to wish to thank Dr. Vedha Nayagam, project scientist, for helpful comments and
suggestions. This work was supported by NASA under COOP Grant NCC3-735. We gratefully
acknowledge discussions with Prof. F.A. Williams and ongoing collaborations with Drs. D.
Dietrich and B. Shaw.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

152

