THE WATER-MIST FIRE SUPPRESSION EXPERIMENT (Mist):
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FROM THE STS-107 MISSION
Angel Abbud-Madrid, J. Thomas McKinnon, Francine Amon
Center for Commercial Applications of Combustion in Space
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
Suleyman Gokoglu
NASA Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
INTRODUCTION
The deficiency in replacing the chemical fire-suppression agents banned by the Montreal
Protocol has lead to an increasing interest in fine water mists as fire suppressants since mists
pose no adverse environmental or health issues and they offer the promise of meeting the
requirements of protecting both water- and weight-sensitive areas due to the low requirements
for total water flow. Unfortunately, there is to date no widely accepted interpretation of the
critical concentration of droplets or the optimum droplet size required to suppress a flame, or
more importantly, of the fundamental mechanisms involved in flame extinguishment by a water
mist.
One of the main obstacles to obtaining such understanding is the difficulty of providing a
simple, well-characterized experimental setup for the flame front/water mist interaction. A
weightless environment provides an ideal place to study this interaction by eliminating the
distorting effects of gravity on the prolonged suspension of a uniform concentration of droplets
and on the complex flow patterns induced by natural convection between the flame front and the
water droplets. In order to take advantage of this environment, the Water-Mist Fire Suppression
experiment (Mist) was flown on the STS-107 mission of the Space Shuttle on January, 2003. It
consisted of a series of microgravity tests that explored the effect of uniformly distributed clouds
of polydisperse water mists on the speed and shape of propagating propane-air premixed flames.
The results from these tests will be used to assess the feasibility of using water mists on the new
generation of fire suppressants on Earth as well as on spacecraft.
DESCRIPTION OF THE Mist EXPERIMENT
Figure 1 shows a three-dimensional model of the Mist flight apparatus with the main
components of the experiment. A mixture of propane (C3H8) and air is loaded in a transparent
cylindrical tube of 6.3-cm diameter and 49.5-cm length. The two gases are introduced in the
tube from separate tanks through a static mixer using mass flow controllers. A polydisperse
water mist generated by an ultrasonic atomizer is introduced in one half of the tube separated by
an iris from the dry region. A light extinction system consisting of three diode lasers shining
radially through the tube into three photodiode detectors is used to obtain droplet concentration
data in different parts of the wet section. After the mist injection, the iris opens and the mixture
is ignited in the dry section while keeping the valve at that end of the tube open for an isobaric
combustion process. In order to measure the fire suppression ability of a given water-mist

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

281

droplet size and water concentration, the propagation velocity of the premixed flame is measured
by a video camera and by an array of 16 photodiodes installed along the tube. The Mist
experiment was designed, fabricated, assembled, and tested at the Center for Commercial
Applications of Combustion in Space (CCACS) at the Colorado School of Mines and later tested
and integrated to the Combustion Module-2 (CM-2) at the NASA Glenn Research Center.

THERMOCOUPLE
GATE VALVE

IGNITER

POWER AND DATA
CONNECTORS

PROPANE BOTTLE

PHOTO DIODE
ARRAY

AIR BOTTLE

ELECTRONICS
PACKAGE

FLAME TUBE

IRIS
STATIC MIXER

PHOTODETECTORS

ULTRASONIC
NOZZLE

VENT

SYRINGE PUMP

MASS FLOW CONTROLLERS

Figure 1. The Mist experiment flight unit.

Figure 2. Configuration used in the microgravity tests and in the numerical model.
In this investigation, a computational model has been developed that uses a hybrid
Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation to simulate the two-phase, flame/mist interaction. Currently,
the model is capable of simulating the free propagation of planar, premixed laminar flames of
various stoichiometries and their interaction with monodisperse water droplets as shown in Fig.
2. Gas-phase chemical kinetics, thermodynamic, and transport properties are handled by the
PREMIX software [1] and are used in the Eulerian representation of the propagating flame.
Various chemical databases are used for the fuel-air reaction mechanisms. This formulation is

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

282

then coupled with droplet source terms from Lagrangian equations of mass, momentum, energy,
and particle flux fraction. The interaction between the two phases is modeled using an
imaginary gas packet that follows the droplet. This algorithm facilitates a stable coupling
between the phases, yet permits solving the gas-phase equations and droplet equations
separately.
EXPERIMENTAL AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
Numerical simulations have been conducted with both CH4-air and C3H8-air flames. The
first simulations consist of two freely propagating, stoichiometric flames–one wet (at 100%
relative humidity) and the other dry. In the case of CH4-air flames, due to the thermal, physical,
and chemical effects of the steam, the burning velocity for the wet case is about 34 cm/s, which
is considerably lower than the dry flame speed of about 39 cm/s. After establishing the two base
cases mentioned above, different droplet sizes and concentrations are introduced in the wet-gas
mixture case. These simulations show that larger droplets penetrate further into the post-flame
region than smaller droplets which undergo rapid vaporization. Near the end of the droplet
lifetime, the vaporization rate accelerates due to the rapidly increasing surface-area-to-volume
ratio. Also, as more condensed water is added into the gas mixture, the maximum and postflame temperatures are reduced. Consequently, the burning velocities are also reduced with
increasing water-mass loading. At some point, the amount of water mist is sufficient to
extinguish the flame. Figure 3 shows the effect of water concentration and droplet size on the
burning velocity of CH4-air flames. As clearly seen in the plot, very fine mists should be more
efficient fire suppressants than larger droplets, although there appears to be a limit around 10 µm
droplets.
During the STS-107 mission, 32 tests were conducted with four different stoichiometries
(φ=0.6, 0.7, 1.0, and 1.3), various water concentrations ranging from water mass fractions of 0
up to 0.40, and with two different droplet size distributions with 20 and 30 µm mean droplet
sizes. A mist behavior characterization study was also performed that showed a consistent
generation and suspension of an extremely uniform and quiescent cloud of droplets for several
minutes as a result of the low microgravity levels (with negligible jitter or oscillations)
experienced in the Space Shuttle. Preliminary results show that the leanest propane-air flames
exhibit progressively lower burning velocities with increasing water loadings and decreasing
droplet size (as predicted by the model) with final extinction at the highest water concentrations.
Stoichiometric and rich flames show additional flame distortion and cellular break up as the
flames traverse the misted section of the tube. Pulsating flames were also observed for lean
mixtures under certain water loadings. It is important to point out that none of these
observations have been possible on the ground or on the KC-135 airplane due to the inability to
form a uniform cloud of droplets prior to the passage of the flame. Thus, the jitter-free
environment of the Space Shuttle was absolutely essential to conduct a controlled study of the
effect of water mist on propagating premixed flames.
CONCLUSIONS
An investigation of the effect of water mists on premixed flame propagation has been
conducted onboard the Space Shuttle to take advantage of the prolonged microgravity
environment to study the effect of uniformly distributed clouds of polydisperse water mists on
the speed and shape of propagating propane-air premixed flames. The suspension of a quiescent
and uniform water mist cloud was confirmed during the microgravity tests. Preliminary results

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

283

show good agreement with trends obtained by the numerical predictions of a computational
model that uses a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation to simulate the two-phase, flame/mist
interaction. Effective flame suppression is observed at progressively higher water loadings and
smaller water droplet sizes. Other unusual flame behavior, such as flame front breakup and
pulsating flames, is still under investigation. The promising results from the microgravity tests
will be used to assess the feasibility of using water mists as fire suppressants on Earth and on
spacecraft.

Figure 3. Effect of droplet diameter at various mass fractions of water on the flame speed of a
planar, stoichiometric CH4-air premixed flame obtained by numerical simulation (from [2]).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported through the Center for Commercial Applications of Combustion
in Space at the Colorado School of Mines under NASA Cooperative Agreement Number NCC8238. We gratefully acknowledge the help of all CM-2 personnel at NASA GRC, of John West at
NASA MSFC, of Edward Riedel, David Petrick, James Johnson, and Ed Ziemba during mission
operations, and of the former CCACS director, Frank Schowengerdt. A special recognition and
our most heartfelt appreciation go to the astronauts of the STS-107 mission of the Space Shuttle
Columbia whose efforts and dedication during the operation of the Mist experiment guaranteed
the success of the project.
REFERENCES
1. Kee, R.J., Grcar, J.F., Miller, A., and Meeks, E., “PREMIX: A Fortran Program for Modeling
Steady Laminar One-Dimensional Premixed Flames,” Sandia National Laboratories, 1998.
2. W. Yang and R.J. Kee, “The Effect of Monodispersed Water Mists on the Structure, Burning
Velocity, and Extinction Behavior of Freely Propagating, Stoichiometric, Premixed,
Methane-Air Flames,” Combustion and Flame, in press.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

284

