DROPLET COMBUSTION IN A SLOW CONVECTIVE FLOW
V. Nayagam1, M.C.Hicks2, M.Ackerman3, J.B. Haggard, Jr.2, F.A. Williams3
1
National Center for Microgravity Research, 2NASA Glenn research Center
21000 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland OH, 44135
3
Center for Energy Research, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
INTRODUCTION
The influences of slow convective flow on droplet combustion, particularly in the low
Reynolds number regime, have received very little attention in the past. Most studies in the
literature are semi-empirical in nature and they were motivated by spray combustion applications
in the moderate to high Reynolds number regime. None of the limited number of fundamental
theoretical studies applicable to low Reynolds numbers have been verified by rigorous
experimental data. Moreover, many unsteady phenomena associated with fluid-dynamic
unsteadiness, such as impulsive starting or stopping of a burning droplet, or flow
acceleration/deceleration effects, have not been investigated despite their importance in practical
applications. In this study we investigate the effects of slow convection on droplet burning
dynamics both experimentally and theoretically. The experimental portion of the study involves
both ground-based experiments in the drop towers and future flight experiments on board the
International Space Station. Heptane and methanol are used as test fuels, and this choice
complements the quiescent-environment studies of the Droplet Combustion Experiment (DCE).
An analytical model that employs the method of matched asymptotic expansions and uses the
ratio of the convective velocity far from the droplet to the Stefan velocity at its surface as the
small parameter for expansion ε has also been developed as a part of this investigation. Results
from the ground-based experiments and comparison with the analytical model are presented in
this report.
EXPERIMENTS
Three separate experimental configurations were examined to generate slow convective
flows past a burning droplet in microgravity in preparation for the flight experiment. The first
configuration, used in the 2.2 Second Drop-Tower Facility employed a “flow tunnel” powered by
a pressurized gas bottle to establish a uniform flow field around a droplet suspended at the end of
a fiber. Initial droplet diameters for these tests were approximately 1.0 mm to 1.5 mm. The
second test configuration, designed for use in the Zero-Gravity Facility ( ZGF, the larger drop
tower providing up to 5 seconds of microgravity), utilized a translating mechanism to move the
droplet at very precise velocities through a quiescent medium to generate a uniform flow field.
The velocities for this system ranged from 0 cm/s to 3 cm/s and initial droplet diameters were
nominally 2.3 mm. The third test configuration was designed to fly on the KC-135 aircraft,
which provides around 20 seconds of microgravity, and it employed a flow-tunnel concept
similar to the 2.2 second tower. However, rather than using pressurized bottles of gas with a
sonic orifice, a fan was used to generate the required flows. In this test configuration only two
flow velocities were used (i.e., 5 cm/s and 10 cm/s) and the initial droplet diameters were
considerably larger at approximately 3 mm.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

157

Tests were run for both n-heptane and methanol in the first two test configurations and for
only n-heptane in the KC-135 experiments. Two wide-band radiometers (i.e., 0.6 mm to 40 mm)
were used in each experimental configuration in the drop towers to obtain measurements of the
gas phase radiative losses. A single wide-band radiometer was used in the KC-135 experimental
rig. All radiometers were calibrated against a blackbody source at distances equal to the distance
from the droplet support fiber employed in the experimental rigs. The backlit images of the
droplet as well as the color images of the flames were obtained during these experiments.
Further details of the experiments can be found in [1].
ANALYSIS
An idealized model for droplet vaporization or combustion in the Burke-Schumann reactionsheet approximation is analyzed in terms of a Peclet number based on the Stefan velocity, taken
to be of order unity, for Lewis numbers of unity and for small values of a parameter ε, defined as
the ratio of the convective velocity far from the droplet to the Stefan velocity at its surface.
Asymptotic solutions for the velocity, pressure and mixture-fraction fields are obtained through
second order in ε. All earlier studies (see, e.g., [2-4]) treated the Reynolds number of convection
as the small parameter. The present analysis is different in principle because a different small
parameter is selected, namely the ratio, ε, of the convection velocity of the gas at infinity to the
velocity of the gas at the droplet surface without nonspherical convection. The mathematical
development therefore is different and precludes addressing the limit of a nonvaporizing droplet.
This selection was made with a view towards the problem intended to be studied. Despite this
difference, the resulting expansions contain all the elements in most of the earlier analyses, some
of which explicitly refer to a “large radial velocity” and become equivalent mathematically to the
present development with appropriate restrictions. The present expansions thus retain essentially
the same range of applicability as earlier analyses, and the resulting alternative development
given here can help to clarify possible differences associated with different expansion
procedures. The results of this analysis are employed to calculate the effects of convection on the
burning rate and on the flame shape. Qualitative comparisons with experiment help to identify
the strengths and limitations of this model. The reader is referred to an earlier paper [5] for a
more detailed discussion of the formulation used in this analysis.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The burning-rate constant, K, the slope of the graph of the square of the droplet diameter as a
function of time, was determined for each test run for which ε is smaller than one. Figure 1
shows the comparison between the experimental measurements and the predictions of the current
asymptotic analysis, where (K/K0 – 1)is plotted against the square root of Reynolds number based
on droplet radius (Re= U ∞ R / ν ∞ ). Here U∞ is the imposed flow velocity, R is the droplet radius,
v∞ is the kinematic viscosity, and Ko is the burning rate constant when there is no flow. A K0
value of 0.75 mm2/s was employed in Fig. 1, although a somewhat higher value (probably 0.8
mm2/s, within experimental accuracy) would be more appropriate, as suggested theoretically and
by the data point at Re=0 in the figure. Also, in calculating the Reynolds number the kinematic
viscosity was taken to be that of air at a mean temperature of 850K, although a somewhat higher
mean temperature (perhaps as high as 1200K) may be more appropriate, which would move the
data points in the figure to smaller values of Re. Since the present theory does not account for

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

158

variable properties, it is essential in comparisons to make an adjustment of this type; if the
theoretical formula is used with ν∞ evaluated at the ambient temperature of about 300K, then the
slope of the theoretical line is much too steep. In view of the uncertainties in K0 and in the
manner of evaluating mean properties, it is best to anticipate differences between theory and
experiment on the order of a factor of two and to consider the agreement that is seen here as
being only qualitative.
The flame shape predictions from the analytical results show good agreement with
experiment. Experimental flame measurements appear to be somewhat narrower and longer than
predicted, as illustrated in Figure 2 for a particular test. This general trend, observed for most of
the comparisons with experiment, may be due to the increase in flame length through finite-rate
chemistry downstream as well as variable properties, which are not addressed in the simplified
analytical model. The comparisons clearly indicate that, even after optimizing the selection of
the value of the diffusion coefficient, flame-shape differences between theory and experiment of
at least 20% should be anticipated.
Figure 3 shows the instantaneous radiative heat loss, Qrad, plotted against the instantaneous
droplet diameter for n-heptane droplets burning in air with ambient flow velocities ranging from
0 cm/s to 10 cm/s. Average initial droplet diameters were 1.25 mm for the 2 second tower,
2.31 mm for the ZGF, and 3.3 mm for the KC-135. The aggregate plot, showing all results on
the same droplet scale, indicate that once the flame transient passes there is an expected
convergence in radiative heat loss. It is apparent that tests performed in the ZGF never extended
beyond the flame transient where flame expansion relative to the droplet diameter reached a
maximum. This is due to the relatively large initial droplet diameters used in these tests and the
commensurately short burn time allowed in this facility (i.e., data begins approximately 3
seconds after 0-g ignition and steady velocity was reached). The considerably smaller droplets
used in the 2 second tower, coupled with the fact that the drop occurred after ignition, allowed
these tests to proceed beyond the flame-expansion period. When results from these tests are
plotted separately on a larger scale an interesting observation can be made concerning the
relationship between radiative heat losses and flow velocity. Preliminary results indicate that
radiative losses tend to decrease as the flow velocity is increased. One possible explanation is
that the flame shape becomes increasingly distorted into an ellipsoidal shape with increased flow.
The distorted flame shape results in a smaller radiating volume and this, coupled with an increase
in convective losses as hot gases are swept downstream, causes a decrease in radiative output
from the gas phase. Additionally, decreases in soot radiation resulting from shorter soot
residence times due to increased convective effects, also contribute to the observed decrease in
radiative output. Recently, we have carried out several experiments with accelerating and
decelerating droplets and the results will be presented elsewhere. Some preliminary results can
be found in [1].
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Predicted qualitative trends from the asymptotic analysis are supported by experiment. The
prediction that the burning rate increases linearly with Reynolds number for small Reynolds
numbers is consistent with experiment. The predicted general elongation of the flame in the
flow direction and its narrowing transversely are consistent with experiment, but these variations
appear to be somewhat more pronounced experimentally, likely because of effects of variable
properties and finite-rate chemistry, especially of soot. It may thus be concluded that qualitative

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

159

trends may be obtained from the theory, but refinements (introducing greater complexity) are
needed for improved quantitative predictions. Experimental results from each of the test
configurations show that radiative heat losses from the gas phase contribute to a substantial
portion of the overall heat loss mechanism. Additional tests are currently underway to
investigate the unsteady effects during convective droplet burning.
REFERENCES
1. Hicks, M.C., Kaib, N., Easton, J., Nayagam, V., Third Joint Meeting of the U.S. Sections of the
Combustion Institute, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 2003.
2. Wichman, I. S., Baum, H. R. in: C.T. Avedisian, V.A. Arpaci (eds), Heat Transfer in
Microgravity, HTD series 269, ASME, New York, 1993, p 111.
3. Fendell, F. E., Sprankle, M. L., Dodson, D. S., J. Fluid Mechanics 26 (1966) 267-280.
4. Gogos, G.., Ayyaswamy, P. S., Combustion and Flame, 74 (2) (1988) 111-129.
5. Ackerman, M., Nayagam, V., Williams, F.A., Third Joint Meeting of the U.S. Sections of the
Combustion Institute, The Combustion Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 2003.
0.6

6

0.5

4

K/Ko - 1

0.4

2

0.3

-6

0.2
0.1

-4

-2

-2

2

4

6

8

10

12

-4
-6
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Re1/2

Figure 2. Flame shape for an initial droplet
diameter of 1.5 mm, an imposed flow speed of 4
cm/s. The solid line is calculated using the theory
while the points represent experimental values.

Figure 1. Burning-rate constant vs Re1/2 number
according to the present theory (line) compared with
experimental data (points).
40
U = 0 - 2 cm/s
U = 3 - 7 cm/s

30

Qrad(W)

U = 8 - 10 cm/s

20

Figure 3. Total radiative flame emission as a
function of droplet diameter for various flow
velocities during n-heptane burning in air at
atmospheric pressure.

10

0
0

1

2

3

D (mm)

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

160

