CO2 Suppression of PMMA Flames in Low-Gravity
G. A. Ruff1, M. Hicks1, W. Mell2, R. Pettegrew3, and A. Malcom3
NASA Glenn Research Center, MS 77-5, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 44135
2
University of Utah, 50 South Campus Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
3
National Center for Microgravity Research, 21000 Brookpark Road Cleveland, OH 44135
1

INTRODUCTION
Even though much has been learned about the effects of microgravity on material
flammability, flame spread, and suppressant effectiveness, uncertainties remain regarding some of
the practical aspects of fire protection in spacecraft. The experiments and simulations underway in
this project are aimed directly at testing, understanding and improving NASA's existing policies and
practices toward fire safety in spacecraft and extraterrestrial habitats. Specifically, the objectives of
this research are:
1. Determine systematically the conditions that will ignite onboard flammable
materials upon passage of an initial premixed gas, firebrand, or aerosol flame
over these materials.
2. Test the effect of firebrands and configuration spacing.
3. Determine the effectiveness of the flow of CO2 extinguisher or other
extinguishing agents.
Experimental and computational investigations are planned to achieve each of the three objectives
above. Even though progress has been made in all of the areas, the majority of data has been
collected for objective (3). Current results from these investigations are discussed below.
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
Determining the effectiveness of a flow of CO2 to extinguish a fire and whether secondary
fires can occur when oxygen is re-introduced after initial extinguishment is the objective of the first
set of experiments conducted in this investigation in the Spacecraft Fire Safety Facility (SFSF), a test
facility designed for operation on NASA's low gravity aircraft. To examine the effectiveness of CO2
to extinguish fires, an oxidizer flow is established over a hollow cylinder (tube) of PMMA
(polymethyl methacrylate) 25 mm long and 19 mm in diameter. The inner diameter of the tube is 9.5
mm. A cartridge heater in the center of the tube pre-heats the sample to 100 deg C to help ensure a
uniform and repeatable ignition. Thermocouples are located on the external surface of the inserted
cartridge heater and on the external surface of the PMMA test sample at the downstream stagnation
point to monitor these temperatures.
Flame extinguishment at flow velocities between 0 and 10 cm/s and 1 atm pressure were
investigated. To begin a test, the oxidizer flow is established at the desired velocity. As the aircraft
exits a parabola, the igniter is energized until a sustained flame is observed on the PMMA. The
igniter is then turned off and the flame becomes well-established through the remainder of the 2-g
pull-up. During the microgravity period, the flame is observed to determine if it extinguishes
because of the low flow rate. If the flame is sustained through this first microgravity period, it is
allowed to burn through a second 2-g pull-up, during which it increases in intensity. At the end of
the pull-up, the flow is quickly switched from oxidizer to a suppressant mixture (either a mixture of
CO2/air or He/air) so that the suppressant reaches the sample after the first few seconds of low
gravity. The flame is then observed to determine if it (i) extinguishes during the low-gravity period,

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

301

(ii) continuously decreases in intensity during low gravity but does not extinguish, or (iii) maintains
a fairly stable intensity and does not extinguish within the low gravity period (approximately 20 sec).
Tests have been conducted for oxidizer mixtures of 21% O2/79% N2 (standard air) and 25%
O2/75% N2 (rich air). Suppressant mixtures having 12.5%, 25%, and 50% CO2 with the balance
being either standard or rich air, depending on the oxidizer, have been evaluated. Data has also been
obtained with He replacing CO2 in the suppressant at similar concentrations. To date, tests have been
conducted on 26 flights and a total of 142 data points have been obtained. A series of ground tests
have also been conducted so that 0-g and 1-g behavior can be compared.
Experimental Results
Figure 1 shows the PMMA surface temperature at the rear stagnation point as a function of
mass flow rate of oxygen (%O2 in flow x ρUA). The open symbols show conditions that selfextinguished. The closed symbols show conditions where the suppressant was applied with the solid
circles indicating flames that were extinguished. The conditions represented by triangles did not
extinguish within the 20 seconds of low-gravity. For O2 flow rates below about 0.7 g/s (velocities
below 5 cm/s for standard air) and surface temperatures below approximately 270 deg C, the flames
extinguished within 20 sec with no addition of suppressant. Increasing either the flow velocity or the
surface temperature allowed the flame to be sustained through the low-gravity period. This result is
similar to that obtained by Goldmeer [1] who showed that increasing the sample temperature made
the flame more difficult to extinguish. On this plot, there is no discernable boundary between flames
that were extinguished by suppressant and those that were not. This is likely the result of the
influence of a number of parameters such a g-jitter, sample pre-heat, flame shape, and duration of
suppressant flow. The effect of these parameters will be the focus of future work.
Figure 2 shows the time-to-extinguish as a function of flow velocity for an oxidizer of rich
air and the suppressant 25% CO2/75% rich air. The time to extinguish plotted in the figure is the
time from when suppressant reached the sample to extinguishment. The images show end views of
the PMMA sample in flowing oxidizer after the flames became stable in low-gravity. At 1 cm/s, the
flame extinguished within 4 sec, primarily because of the weak flame. The time to extinguish
increased at 2 cm/s but was then observed to decrease with increasing velocity. At the higher
velocities, the flame did not wrap completely around the cylinder but was open in the wake region.
The luminosity and thickness of the flame increased with velocity, as did the width of the wake
region where the flame was absent. These results show the interdependence of the flow velocity and
subsequent flame intensity and structure on the suppression behavior. Additional tests are being
conducted using lower CO2 concentrations to elucidate the role of velocity and flame development
on the time to extinguish.
THEORETICAL INVESTIGATION
Due of the limited duration of low gravity on the aircraft and the difficulty in quantifying the
effect of g-jitter on suppression near the extinction boundary, a modeling effort is supporting the
experimental program. A modified version of the Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) computer code
[2,3] was used to conduct two-dimensional simulations of ignition and flame spread along
(perpendicular to the axis) a PMMA cylinder. Prior to beginning calculations, the finite volume
radiation solver in the FDS code was modified so that gas-phase radiation was properly accounted
for when the finite rate chemistry model is invoked. This radiation solver determines the radiation
flux on the surface of the PMMA and the divergence of the radiation flux in the gas. The ideal gases
were assumed to be gray and non-sooting. Absorption coefficients for H2O and CO2 were
determined using RadCal [4].

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

302

Following the work of previous researchers, the chemical reaction of MMA vapor generated by
PMMA pyrolysis was modeled using a one-step overall chemical reaction (F + O2 -> CO2 + H2O)
and second-order Arrehnius kinetics [5,6]. Kinetic constants were obtained from Seshandri and
Williams [7]. The specific heats of the gaseous species were assumed constant and equal; molecular
transport coefficients were temperature-dependent [4]. In-depth heat transfer at each surface point on
PMMA solid was modeled using a one-dimensional conduction equation. The net heat flux at each
surface point was comprised of convective flux, incident radiation flux, re-radiation from the hot
surface, and heat loss due to PMMA vaporization. The degradation of the PMMA solid and resulting
mass flux of fuel gas was modeled assuming constant density, negligible surface regression, and first
order kinetics [4].
The two-dimensional simulations assumed a symmetry plane oriented parallel to the imposed
flow through the axis of the cylinder. Gas phase ignition occurred by placing a “hot wire” in the
symmetry plane just upwind of the solid. Experimentally measured values of the incoming flow
velocities and composition, igniter duration, acceleration disturbance, and the initial temperature of
the PMMA were used. Most simulations used a uniform grid with 1 mm grid cell dimensions in a 4.5
cm x 10 cm domain.
Model Results
A number of experimental cases have been simulated and, in general, the trends observed in
the experiments were reproduced. Interestingly, the simulation has also mirrored the sensitivity of
the environmental conditions on the effect of suppressant just as in the experiment. For example, a
test condition having an oxidizer of standard air at 8.5 cm/s and suppressant mixture of 12.5% CO2
at 9.3 cm/s was simulated. A plot of the net surface heat flux from simulations with and without
incident radiation flux is shown on Fig. 3a while the associated acceleration history is shown in Fig.
3b. It can be seen that up to the onset of reduced gravity (t < 325 s), the net flux is larger when gasphase radiation incident on the PMMA is included. Although the contribution of incident radiant
flux does not appear to be significant, relative to the net flux, it raises the PMMA surface
temperature enough (i.e., preheats the PMMA) to ensure pyrolysis throughout the duration of
reduced gravity and suppressant. When the gray-gas model was applied, the flame sustained because
of the higher surface temperatures. It extinguished when the surface temperature was lower.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
A significant amount of data has been obtained and is being analyzed to extract the details
about the effect of CO2 and He suppressants in low gravity. The simulations have proven useful in
identifying the effect of various parameters that are difficult to isolate in the experiment. Meanwhile,
the preparations are underway to conduct the experiments to achieve objectives (1) and (2), as
previously identified.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by an award under NASA NRA 99-HEDS-04 titled “Secondary Fires:
Initiation and Extinguishment”.
References
1.

Goldmeer, J. S., T’ien, J. S. and Urban, D. L., 1999, “Combustion and extinction of PMMA cylinders during
depressurization in low-gravity,” Fire Safety Journal, Vol. 32, pp. 61-88.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

303

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

McGrattan, K.B. and Baum, H.R. and Rehm, R.G. and Hamins, A. and Forney, G.P. and Floyd, J.E. and Hostikka,
S. and Prasad, K., “Fire Dynamics Simulator, Technical Reference Guide,” National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), 2002, NISTIR 6782, 2002 Ed., http://fire.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/
Mell, W.E., McGrattan, K.B., Baum, H.R., “g-jitter Effects on Spherical Diffusion Flames,” to be submitted to
Microgravity Science and Technology.
Grosshandler, W. 1993, “A narrow band model for radiation calculations in a combustion environment,” NIST
Technical Note (TN 1402).
Altenkirch, R.A., Tang, L., Sacksteder, K., Bhattachrjee, S., and Delichatsios, M.A., 1998, “Inherently unsteady
flame spread to extinction over thick fuels in microgravity,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Vol. 27, pp.
2515-2524.
Yang, C.T. and T’ien, J.S., 1998, “Numerical simulation of combustion and extinction of a solid cylinder in lowCspeed cross flow,” J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 120, pp. 1055-1063.
Seshandri, K. and Williams, F.A., 1978, “Structure and extinction of counterflow diffusion flames above condensed
fuels: Comparison between Polymethyl Methacrylate and its liquid monomer, both burning in nitrogen-air
mixtures,” J. of Polymer Science: Polymer Chemistry Ed., Vol. 16, pp. 1755-1778.
500

14

Self-Extinguished
Extinguished with Suppressant
Did Not Extiguish

450

C

12

Time to Extinguish (sec)

Surface Temperature (C)

400
350
300
250
200

10

B
B

8

6

C
A

4

A

150
2

100

Self-Extinguished

50
0

0.5
1
Mass Flow Rate of Oxygen (g/sec)

0

1.5

0

2

4

8

10

Figure 2. Time to extinguish for 25% CO2/75%
rich air mixture

Figure 1. Low-gravity sustained flammability map

a. Net heat flux

b. Acceleration

Figure 3. Effect of gas radiation model on suppression

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

6

Flow Velocity (cm/s)

304

