EFFECT OF LOW EXTERNAL FLOW ON FLAME SPREADING
OVER ETFE INSULATED WIRE UNDER MICROGRAVITY
Katsuhiro Nishizawa, Osamu Fujita, Kenichi Ito
Dept. of Mechanical Science, Hokkaido University, Kita-13 Nishi-8, kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8628,
Japan
Masao Kikuchi
National Space Development Agency of Japan, 2-1-1, Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8505,
Japan
Sandra L. Olson
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135, USA
Takashi Kashiwagi
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, USA
1. INTRODUCTION
Fire safety is one of the most important issues for manned space missions. A likely cause of
fires in spacecraft is wire insulation combustion in electrical system. Regarding the wire
insulation combustion it important to know the effect of low external flow on the combustion
because of the presence of ventilation flow in spacecraft. Although, there are many researches on
flame spreading over solid material at low external flows under microgravity [1,2], research
dealing with wire insulation is very limited. An example of wire insulation combustion in
microgravity is the Space Shuttle experiments carried out by Greenberg et al [3]. However, the
number of experiments was very limited. Therefore, the effect of low flow velocity is still not
clear. The authors have reported results on flame spreading over ETFE (ethylenetetrafluoroetylene) insulated wire in a quiescent atmosphere in microgravity by 10 seconds drop
tower [4]. The authors also performed experiments of polyethylene insulated nichrom wire
combustion in low flow velocity under microgravity [5]. The results suggested that flame spread
rate had maximum value in low flow velocity condition. Another interesting issue is the effect of
dilution gas, especially CO2, which is used for fire extinguisher in ISS. There are some
researches working on dilution gas effect on flame spreading over solid material in quiescent
atmosphere in microgravity [4,6]. However the research with low external flow is limited and, of
course, the research discussing a relation of the appearance of maximum wire flammability in
low flow velocity region with different dilution gas cannot be found yet. The present paper,
therefore, investigates the effect of opposed flow with different dilution gas on flame spreading
over ETFE insulated wire and change in the presence of the maximum flammability depending
on the dilution gas type is discussed within the limit of microgravity time given by ground-based
facility.
Generally, solid combustion has longer time scale than other phase fuel, especially with thick
sample and/or low oxygen concentration and it is difficult to obtain reliable data in short time
microgravity test. Therefore, the present work is limited to high oxygen concentration cases with
thin fuel. To attain general understanding of wire insulation combustion, the test with long-term
microgravity is essential. This subject is selected as a candidate of ISS flight test at IAO2000
NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

177

(Effect of Material Properties on Wire Flammability in Weak Ventilation of Spacecraft
(FireWIRE)) and the research is now under definition stage.
2. EXPERIMENTAL
The experiments were performed at the Japan
Microgravity Center (JAMIC) 10s dropshaft and NASA’s
KC-135 aircraft. The detail of the setup for KC-135 test
is described in Ref. [7].
Figure 1 shows the combustion chamber with flow
duct used for JAMIC test. The combustion chamber is a
rectangular airtight vessel, and a flow duct is installed in
the chamber. The chamber has an air suction fan at the
left end of the duct. The flow velocity in the duct is
controlled in the range 0 to 30cm/s.
Fig.1 Out line of combustion
A sample wire, which is fixed to the sample holder
chamber
with igniter, is installed in the center of the flow duct
parallel to the external flow. Flame spreads opposed to the external flow (from left to right in
Fig.1). ETFE (ethylene- tetrafluoroethylene copolymer) insulated copper wire was used as a test
sample. The sample use in the experiments is 0.32mm inner core and 0.15mm insulation
thickness (AWG28). Experiments were performed with different O2 concentrations, external
flow velocities and dilution gas, N2 and CO2.
3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 OBSERVATION OF FLAME
Figure 2 shows photographs of
spreading flame at different flow velocity
in 35% O2 with CO2 dilution. It shows
that the flame is luminous with blue
flame region at the front of the flame in
all external flow velocity. At 0cm/s, the
trailing edge of flame becomes wide in
comparison with the leading edge. When
external flow is given, flame shape as
(a) 0cm/s
(b) 2cm/s
seen in Fig.2 (b), (c) and (d), is
cylindrical with almost same diameter
along the wire.
Another interesting phenomenon is
unsteady flame spreading with CO2
dilution at low flow velocity, 0 and
2cm/s. Figure 3 shows the typical
sequential photos of spreading flame at
(c) 5cm/s
(d) 10cm/s
2cm/s with CO2 dilution. The time
Fig.2 Photographs of spreading flames over ETFE
interval of each photo is approximately
insulated wire under different external air flow with
0.2s. A most ordinal flame shape is the
CO2 dilution (O2=35%)
one as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Then, at the

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

178

flame
front
blue
flame
propagates fast as shown in
Fig.3(b), (c). After that, another
luminous flame grows at the
front of spreading blue flame
front as see in Fig.3 (d). This
secondary luminous flame is
(a)
(b)
small at first but increases in size
with time as shown in Fig. 3(e),
(f). Then, the primary luminous
flame quenches and secondary
flame spreads. This unsteady
phenomenon
is
unique
(c)
(d)
phenomena observed in low
external flow condition with
CO2 dilution. One of the
possibility reasons of the
unsteady
phenomenon
is
reabsorption effect of CO2 gas.
(e)
(f)
In low flow velocity, preheat
Fig.3 Sequential photographs of spreading flames in low
length is strongly affected by
velocity flow with CO2 dilution (Ve=2.1cm/s)
reabsorption [8]. The preheat
length becomes longer with time by CO2 reabsorption when flow velocity is low. Then, heat
transfer to unburned fuel at the preheat zone increases. When total heat supply to the unburned
region reaches critical amount, suddenly flame spreads fast and the preheat length decrease again.

Flame Spread Rate(mm/s)

Flame Spread Rate(mm/s)

3.2 FLAME SPREAD RATE
Flame spread rate is determined based on the motion picture taken by digital video camera.
Fig.4 shows plots of flame spread rate as a function of flow velocity for different oxygen
concentrations with N2 dilution. The flame spread rate generally increases with increase in
ambient oxygen concentration, irrespective of flow velocity. Another interesting feature with N2
dilution is the trend to show a maximum flame spread rate at a certain flow velocity, around

6

6

4

4

2

0

2

35%
40%
10
20
Air Flow Velocity(cm/s)

0

Fig.4 Flame spread rate as a function of
external air flow velocity (N2 dilution)

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

N2
CO2
5
10
15
Air Flow Velocity(cm/s)

Fig.5 Flame spread rate with different
dilution gas (O2=35%)

179

5cm/s, in low flow velocity region. This trend qualitatively agrees with the case of polyethylene
insulated wire [5]. This is one of the feature of wire insulation combustion, which is explained as
an geometrical effect in Ref.[5].
Figure 5 shows the flame spread rate change as a function of external flow velocity with
different dilution gas. The flame spread rate with N2 is faster than that with CO2 at 35% O2,
irrespective of flow velocity. The trend of flame spread rate is different between N2 and CO2.
With N2, flame spread rate tends to have maximum value as mentioned baove. On the other hand,
CO2 dilution case resulted in the highest flame spread rate at Ve=0cm/s and decrease
monotonically with increase in flow velocity. Then, it reaches almost constant spread rate over a
certain flow velocity. Therefore, the flame spread rate has no maximum value in low flow
velocity region with CO2 case. One of the reasons of the difference is reabsorption effect of CO2
gas. With CO2, radiation heat from the flame is reabsorbed in preheat region [8] and flame
temperature decrese is not large, while N2 dilution leads to large temperature decrease causing
decrease in flame spread rate. In high flow velocity region the reabsorption effect is not important
and the trend becomes similar to N2 dilution case.
4. SUMMARY
(1) The dependence of flame spread rate on flow velocity was examined with drop tower and
aircraft. Specially, flame spread rate with N2 and CO2 was compared. Flame spread rate
was 2-6mm/s even if oxygen concentration was 35% or higher. Therefore, it is difficult to
obtain data with low O2 concentration or thick sample in ground-based facility. Long term
microgravity test such as ISS is expected.
(2) Flame spread rate with N2 has maximum value in low flow velocity region, while with CO2
flame spread rate increases monotonically with decrease in flow velocity. One of the
explanations of the difference is effects of sample geometry and reabsorption of CO2 gas.
(3) Unsteady flame spread phenomenon was observed with CO2 dilution. This phenomenon is
explained by CO2 reabsorption effect, which is to be investigated in the next step.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by NASDA (National Space Development Agency of Japan) and JSF
(Japan Space Forum) as a selected subject of microgravity science research IAO2000. The early
part of this research was supported by the NEDO (New Energy and Industrial Technology
Development Organization of Japan) through the JSUP (Japan Space Utilization Promotion
Center) as a part of R&D project of multi fuel combustion technology utilizing microgravity.
REFERENCES
[1] S. L. Olson, Combust. Sci. Technol, 76, 233, (1991)
[2] T. Kashiwagi et al., Proc. Combust. Inst., 26, 1345, (1996)
[3] P. S. Greenberg et al., 3rd International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, 25, (1995) /
K.R Sacksteder, P.S.Greenberg, and J.S.T’ien, Proc. of the 3rd Joint Metting of U.S.Sections
of the Combustion Institute.
[4] M. Kikuchi et al., Proc. Combust. Inst., 27, 2507, (1998)
[5] O. Fujita et al., Combust. Inst., 29, (2002) (in print)
[6] L. K. Honda et al., Combust. Sci. Technol., 133, 267, (1998)
[7] O. Fujita et al., 6th International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, (2001)
[8] O. Fujita et al., Proc. Combust. Inst., 28, 2905, (2000)

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

180

