MICROGRAVITY SUPERAGGLOMERATES PRODUCED BY SILANE
AND ACETYLENE
Matthew Bundy, George W. Mulholland, Samuel Manzello, Jiann Yang, John Henry Scott
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899
Yudaya Sivathanu
En’Urga, Inc., West Lafayette, IN 47906.
Introduction
The size of the agglomerates produced in the in the upper portion of a flame is important
for a variety of applications. Soot particle size and density effect the amount of radiative heat
transfer from a fire to its surroundings. Particle size determines the lifetime of smoke in a
building or in the atmosphere, and exposure hazard for smoke inhaled and deposited in the lungs.
The visibility through a smoke layer and dectectability of the smoke are also greatly affected by
agglomerate size. Currently there is limited understanding of soot growth with an overall
dimension of 10 µm and larger. In the case of polystyrene, smoke agglomerates in excess of 1
mm have been observed “raining” out from large fires.
Unlike hydrocarbon fuels, silane has the advantage that silica particles are the major
combustion product resulting in a particle volume fraction a factor of ten greater than that for a
carbonaceous smoke. There are two very desirable properties of silica aero-gels that are
important for both space and earth based applications. The first important property is its
inertness to most oxidizing and reducing atmospheres. Therefore, silica aero-gels make
excellent fire ablatives and can be used in very demanding applications. The second important
property is that silica aero-gels are expected to have very high porosity (greater than 0.999),
making them lightweight and ideal for aerospace applications. The added benefit of the high
porosity is that they can be used as extremely efficient filters for many earth based applications
as well.
Evidence of the formation of superagglomerates in a laminar acetylene/air diffusion
flame was found by Sorensen et al. [1]. An interconnecting web of super-agglomerates was
observed to span the width of the soot plume in the region just above the flame tip and described
as a gel state. It was observed that this gel state immediately breaks up into agglomerates as
larges as 100 µm due to buoyancy induced turbulence. Large soot agglomerates were observed
in microgravity butane jet diffusion flames by Ito et al.[2]. Several other works to date have
studied the effect of flame structure on soot volume fraction and agglomeration size in a
microgravity environment.[3-4]. In microgravity the absence of buoyant convective flows
increases the residence time in the flame and causes a broadening of the high temperature region
in the flame. Both of these factors play a significant role in gas phase radiation and soot
formation
Experimental Hardware
Experiments were performed using a combustion “drop rig” that was designed for use at
NASA Glenn’s 2.2 second drop tower facility. The hardware consisted of a 25 L combustion
chamber, an open tube burner, a gas flow control system, an electrical system and an imaging

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

57

system. The burner consisted of a 4.52 mm diameter stainless steel tube positioned along the
centerline 15 cm above the base of the chamber. Two CCD video cameras were used to image
the flame and soot plume. Illumination for imaging the agglomerates was provided using a
microsecond Xenon flashlamp. A 0.25 mm diameter Kanthol hot-wire was used to ignite the
flame. Pressure transducers were used to monitor the fuel bottle and combustion chamber
pressure. Rotary solenoids were used to position the ignition wire and TEM sampling grid.
Normal Gravity Experiments
Acetylene and silane was burned in the standard NASA cylindrical combustion chamber.
A digital camera with backlighting through a diffuser was used to photograph both the flame and
smoke plume as illustrated in the lower portions of the Figure 1. The photographs show the

a

b

d

c

e

f

Figure 1. Photograph of acetylene and silane flames in normal gravity.
flame and plume for an acetylene fuel flow rate of 0.66 cm3/s, 2.10 cm3/s, and for a silane flow
rate of 2.1 cm3/s (a, b and c respectively). The series of photographs (d, e, and f) in Fig. 2 were
taken at a location about 9 cm from the burner exit with the digital camera and a Xenon flash
lamp with a pulse duration of 1.3 µs and a pulse energy of 0.35 J to “freeze” the motion of the
soot agglomerates. At the lower flow rate the soot appears as a relatively gray background while
at the larger flow, individual 50 µm to 100 µm particles appear to be connected across much of
the plume. Other noteworthy features are the increasing plume width with increasing fuel flow
rate and the sharpness of the smoke boundary. For the silane flames, filaments were observed
leaving the flame zone rather than superagglomerates such as for acetylene. A µs flash
photograph of a filament 9 cm above the flame is shown in Fig. 1c.
Fibrous particles were examined with a stereomicroscope (Fig 2a) and a field emission
scanning electron microscope (Fig. 2b). The SEM micrograph shows evidence of partially fused
spherule structures with diameters as small as 150 nm. We expected that the much larger
particulate volume fraction for the silane flame would lead to a totally interconnected gel-like
structure and were surprised to observe a fibrous material. It is likely that the combination of the
higher flame temperature for silane combustion together with the lower melting point of SiO2
particulate has resulted in the formation of the partially fused filaments. An interesting hollow
cage-like structure, shown in Fig. 2c was produced when the fuel line was purged with a pulse of
nitrogen at the end of the experiment. This suggests that varying the flame temperature by
diluting the silane will likely be important in controlling the morphology of the silane particles.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

58

a

b

c

Figure. 2. Optical micrograph of silica fiber.
Microgravity Acetylene Experiments
Microgravity experiments were performed in a 2.2 second drop tower using acetylene at
flow rates of 0.6 cc/s, 1.0 cc/s and 2.0 cc/s. Fig. 3 (a and b) shows images of the acetylene
flames and soot plumes recorded during the microgravity experiments. The microgravity flame
was three times as wide as the normal gravity flame.

a

b

c

Figure 3. Images of acetylene flame and the soot plume and a TEM photo.
Although detailed measurements of the agglomerate size were not possible due to the low
image resolution, approximate particle sizes were attained in the post flame region between 2.5
cm and 5.5 cm above the burner. Microgravity superagglomerates as large as (1.2 ± 200) mm
were observed in these experiments. Another noteworthy observation is apparent from
inspection of the flame video in slow motion. It appears that superagglomerates can be seen
escaping from the open flame tip annulus in the µG flames at acetylene flow rates of 0.6 cc/s and
1.0 cc/s. This suggests that the large soot agglomerates are formed in the high temperature
region of the flame. Detailed measurement of the primary particle size distribution was
performed for soot sampled at three flame conditions at a location of 25 mm above the burner
duct. At least 100 primary spheres were analyzed for each condition. The diameter of the
primary particles for the 2.0 cc/s flame was measured to be (45.4 ± 10.2) nm in µ-g and (40.0 ±
11.4) nm in 1-g. A digitized TEM micrographs for soot particles sampled above the 1.0 cc/s
acetylene flame in microgravity is shown in Fig. 9. Inspection of this image clearly shows
clusters formed from 2 different primary particle sizes measured to have diameters of (16.3 ± 5)
nm and (43.0 ± 9) nm. This feature was found throughout the entire TEM grid with a slightly
higher number of small particle clusters, however since only a single TEM grid was collected for
this condition the nature and generality of this bimodal feature is uncertain.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

59

Numerical Simulations
Temperature and soot volume fraction contours for normal gravity and microgravity
acetylene flames were calculated [8,9]. These results were consistent with the qualitative
observations from the µG experiments. The calculations of the soot volume fraction and
temperature field in the flame zone/plume together with the calculation of the particle position
versus time provides the necessary input to estimate the agglomerate growth for the case of a 1
cm3/s acetylene flow rate [10]. Our agglomeration simulations suggest than free molecular
coagulation together with gelation are too slow to produce superagglomerates of size greater
than 100 µm for 1-g experiments. The simulations predict a relatively modest enhancement in
the agglomeration as the gel point is approached for the free molecular limit. For µ-g conditions,
our simulation results predict a maximum agglomerate length of 35 µm based on fV=6.0×10-6
and a length of 680 µm for fV=6.0×10-4. For the higher density it is seen that the agglomeration
model predicts that agglomerates approaching the critical gel size would form in a flame at µ-g
conditions.
Conclusions
1.
2.
3.
4.

For the first time in µ-g the emission of soot super-agglomerates from the luminous flame
was visually demonstrated by simultaneously imaging the flame and soot plume.
The burning of silane at 1-g results in novel structures including fibers and cage-like
structures depending on the time/temperature history for the particles in the flame.
The flame calculations show an increased residence time in µ-g which helps explain
enhanced agglomerate growth.
A soot agglomerate model based on Brownian motion can not account for the
superagglomerates observed in acetylene flames at 1-g.

Acknowledgements
This work is funded by NASA Microgravity Combustion Program with Suleyman
Gokoglu as technical monitor. Paul Greenburg, David Urban, and Eric Bauman from NASA
Glenn provide significant support for the drop tower experiments. Jinyu Zhu designed the silane
flow system, Anthony Hamins carried out silane flame calculations, and Marco Fernandez
fabricated the Super Agglomerate Drop Tower facility.
References
[1]
Sorensen, C.M., Hageman, W.B., Rush, T.J., Huang, H., Oh, C., Phys. Rev. Lett.,80:1782
(1998).
[2]
Ito, H., Fujita, O., Ito, K., Combustion and Flame, 99:363 (1994).
[3]
Ku, J.C., Tong, L., Sun, J., Greenberg, P.S., Griffin, D.W., Proceedings of the Second
International Microgravity Combustion Workshop, 121 (1992).
[4]
Koylu, U.O. and Faeth, G.M., Combustion and Flame, 89:140 (1992).
[5]
Sivathanu, Y.R. and Gore, J.P., Combustion and Flame, 97: 161 (1994).
[6]
Leung, K.M., Lindsted, and Jones, W.P., Combustion and Flame, 87:289 (1991).
[7]
Mulholland et al., Energy and Fuels, 2, 481-486 (1988).

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

60

