PARTICLE EFFECTS ON THE EXTINCTION AND IGNITION
OF FLAMES IN NORMAL- AND MICRO-GRAVITY
M.G. ANDAC, F. N. EGOLFOPOULOS & C. S. CAMPBELL
Department of Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California 90089-1453
INTRODUCTION
Reacting dusty flows have been studied to lesser extent than pure gas phase flows and
sprays. Particles can significantly alter the ignition, burning and extinction characteristics of the
gas phase due to the dynamic, thermal, and chemical couplings between the phases. The
understanding of two-phase flows can be attained in stagnation flow configurations, which have
been used to study spray combustion [e.g. 1] as well as reacting dusty flows [e.g. 2]. The
thermal coupling between inert particles and a gas, as well as the effect of gravity, were studied in
Ref. 3. It was also shown that the gravity can substantially affect parameters such as the particle
velocity, number density, mass flux, and temperature.
In Refs. 4 and 5, the effects of inert particles on the extinction of strained premixed and nonpremixed flames were studied both experimentally and numerically at 1-g and m-g. It was shown
that large particles can cool flames more effectively than smaller particles. The effects of flame
configuration and particle injection orientation were also addressed. It was shown that it was not
possible to obtain a simple and still meaningful scaling that captured all the pertinent physics due
to the complexity of the couplings between parameters. Also, the cooling by particles is more
profound in the absence of gravity as gravity works to reduce the particle number density in the
neighborhood of the flame.
The efforts were recently shifted towards the understanding of the effects of combustible
particles on extinction [6], the gas-phase ignition by hot particle injection [7], and the hot gas
ignition of flames in the presence of particles that are not hot enough to ignite the gas phase by
themselves.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH
The experimental configuration includes the use of two counter-flowing jets in 1-g and m-g.
Particles are fed into the flow by using a particle seeder located in the bottom jet. However, the
particle pickup is strongly affected by gravitational forces so that the seeder has to be calibrated
separately at the lab for 1-g and on board KC-135 for m-g. Extinction studies were conducted
numerically and experimentally with 50-mm combustible glassy-carbon particles. Premixed and
non-premixed flame extinction experiments were conducted by varying the particle number
density, the equivalence ratio, fuel type, flame configuration, and strain rate.
In all studies, a single flame was established at conditions close to the extinction state, below
the gas phase stagnation plane (GSP) by injecting the combustible mixture from the bottom
burner with the particles against an air jet. The fuel flow rate was then decreased very slowly,
until the flames were extinguished. The final composition was recorded as the extinction

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

89

equivalence ratio, fext, for the prevailing conditions. The strain rates were determined globally.
Ignition studies were only performed numerically using 60 and 70-mm Al2O3 particles.
NUMERICAL APPROACH
The code was built around a quasi-one-dimensional set of equations for the gas phase similar
to the one in [8], by incorporating terms that account for both the dynamic and thermal
interactions between the phases. The equations for the particle phase were formulated for a
single inert particle, as the number densities are small enough so that particles are unlikely to
interact with each other. The code also includes a conservation equation describing the evolution
of the particle number density [3]. The solutions are obtained by simultaneously integrating the
entire system of equations. The kinetics was described by the GRI 3.0 mechanism [9]. The code
is integrated with the CHEMKIN [10] and Transport [11] subroutine libraries.
SUMMARY OF RECENT RESEARCH
The calibration results for carbon particles are shown in Fig. 1 as the variation of injection
particle number density, np.inj with the gas flow rate. It can be observed that for both 1-g and mg,
and for both low and high feeder speeds, np increases up to a certain flow rate, where it exhibits a
local maximum. Above this flow rate, the rate of increase of the amount of particles put in the
flow per unit time is smaller than the rate of increase in gas volume flow rate. As might be
expected, np also increases with the particle feeder speed. The higher the feeder speed, the higher
the gas flow rate corresponding to the maximum np is reached. More particles are entrained in the
flow in mg compared to 1-g at lower flow rates but the amount of particle delivery is the same at
higher flow rates regardless of gravity.
Figure 2a depicts the variation of experimentally determined fext with the global strain rate
Kglb, in 1-g for CH4/air flames for injection number density of np,inj ª 0 and 400 part/cm3. In both
cases fext increases with Kglb, which should be expected as stronger flames are extinguished at
larger strain rates. The data reveals that the presence of reacting carbon particles augments the
resistance to extinction as weaker flames can be sustained at the same Kglb. The results of Fig. 2a
also reveal that for high Kglb’s the observed difference between the fext’s obtained with and
without particles nearly disappears implying that the particles either do not ignite or even if they
do, the ignition occurs well downstream of the gaseous flame so that the effect of the additional
heat release has only a small effect on the flame.
Figure 2b depicts similar results for C3H8/air flames. Similar to the CH4 flames, particles
appear to resist extinction at the lower Kglb’s, but at higher strain rates, the two curves merge and
cross each other. Thus, at high strain rates, the particles do not ignite and promote extinction in
exactly the same manner as inert particles.
Figure 3 depicts the opposite problem of ignition in the presence of inert particles. It shows
the variation of the ignition temperature, Tign, with the injection particle number density, np,inj, for
three cases, where 60-mm Al2O3 particles are injected at 300 K. In all cases, particles are injected
with a 1/3 molar ratio CH4/N2 mixture against air. Then, the temperatures of the fuel-side, the
air-side or both sides were increased until ignition is achieved.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

90

It is seen that the addition of cold particles into the flowfield significantly affects the ignition
temperature for all cases regardless of whether the particles are injected from the hot or cold jet.
It is also apparent that much higher temperatures are required for ignition when the air is injected
cold compared to other cases. This is solely due to the strong dependence of the ignition process
on OH radical generation through the main chain branching reaction H+O2 Æ OH+O. This
reaction favors high temperatures and, as the O2 is only available on the air-side, it will be
strongly inhibited by cold air injection.
Looking at the hot air cases, ignition temperatures are smaller if the fuel and particles are
initially heated - as would be expected. At first glance it appears that the two curves are parallel,
but actually, there is a much weaker effect for the hot-fuel/hot-air case. Note that the two curves
are 100 K apart at np,inj = 10 part/cm3 and 200 K apart at np,inj = 1000 part/cm3. Figure 4 depicts
the gas phase temperature profiles for np,inj = 10 and 1000 part/cm3 for the two cases right before
ignition. For hot fuel, the cold particles cool the gas phase such that the temperatures around
GSP are reduced dramatically. Similarly for the cold-fuel case, the location of the rapid
temperature rise shifts towards the top burner, again due to the cooling by the particles.
Figure 5 depicts the H radical mass fraction distributions that also serve as markers of the
ignition kernels. The results reveal that when the number density is low, the flame tries to ignite
very close to the GSP on the air-side, where strain rates are highest. However, the radical pool is
larger in magnitude and volume for the case that the temperatures of both jets are increased. The
cooling around the GSP shifts the location of the ignition kernels towards the top burner, i.e. to
lower strain rate region, but more so for the case for which the temperatures of both jets are
increased. Thus, ignition becomes easier for this case compared to the other as np,inj increases.
Figure 6 depicts the variation of the maximum H mass fraction, YH,max, with np,inj for cases
where premixed twin CH4/air flames are ignited by hot 70-mm Al2O3 particles for three values of
the equivalence ratio. The H radical increases rapidly at the ignition point. It is seen that leaner
mixtures ignite easier, as indicated by the lower values of np,inj and Tmax,ign found as f decreases.
REFERENCES
1. Chen, G. & Gomez, A., Proc. Combust. Inst. 24: 1531-1539 (1992).
2. Gomez, A. & Rosner, D.E., Combust. Sci. Tech. 89: 335-362 (1993).
3. Egolfopoulos, F.N. & Campbell, C.S., Combust. Flame 117: 206-226 (1999).
4. Andac, M.G., Egolfopoulos, F.N., Campbell, C.S. & Lauvergne, R., Proc. Combust. Inst. 28:
2921-2929 (2000).
5. Andac, M.G., Egolfopoulos, F.N. & Campbell, C.S., Combust. Flame, 129:179-191 (2001).
6. Andac, M.G., Egolfopoulos, F.N. & Campbell, C.S., Proc. Combust. Inst. 29, in press.
7. F. N. Egolfopoulos, C.S. Campbell, and M.G. Andac, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29, in press.
8. Bowman, C.T., Frenklach, M., Gardiner, W.R., and Smith, G. 1999 “The GRI 3.0 Chemical
Kinetic Mechanism.” http://www.me.berkeley.edu/gri_mech/.
9. Kee, R. J., Miller, J. A., Evans, G. H. & Dixon-Lewis, G., Proc. Combust. Inst. 22: 14791494 (1988).
10. Kee, R. J., Warnatz, J. & Miller, J. A., Sandia Report SAND83-8209, 1983.
11. Kee, R. J., Rupley, F. M. & Miller, J. A., Sandia Report SAND89-8009, 1989.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by NASA Grant NCC3-834 under the technical supervision of
Dr. Ming-Shin Wu of the Glenn Research Center

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

91

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

Figure 6

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

92

