An Earth-Based Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus
to Assess Material Flammability for Microgravity & Extraterrestrial Fire-Safety Applications
S.L. Olson*,
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135
H. Beeson, and J.P. Haas,
NASA White Sands Test Facility, Las Cruces, NM
Abstract
The objective of this project is to modify the standard oxygen consumption (cone) calorimeter (described in ASTM
E 1354 and NASA STD 6001 Test 2) to provide a reproducible bench-scale test environment that simulates the buoyant
or ventilation flow that would be generated by or around a burning surface in a spacecraft or extraterrestrial gravity level.
This apparatus will allow us to conduct normal gravity experiments that accurately and quantitatively evaluate a
material’s flammability characteristics in the real-use environment of spacecraft or extra-terrestrial gravitational
acceleration. The Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus (ELSA) uses an inverted cone geometry with the sample burning
in a ceiling fire configuration that provides a reproducible bench-scale test environment that simulates the buoyant or
ventilation flow that would be generated by a flame in a spacecraft or extraterrestrial gravity level. Prototype unit testing
results are presented in this paper. Ignition delay times and regression rates for PMMA are presented over a range of
radiant heat flux levels and equivalent stretch rates which demonstrate the ability of ELSA to simulate key features of
microgravity and extraterrestrial fire behavior.
Introduction
NASA’s current method of material screening determines fire resistance under conditions representing a worst-case
[1]
for normal gravity flammability - the Upward Flame Propagation Test (Test 1 ). The applicability of Test 1 to fires in
microgravity and extraterrestrial environments, however, is uncertain because the relationship between this buoyancydominated test and actual extraterrestrial fire hazards is not fully understood. Flames in micro-gravity are known to
[2]
preferentially spread upwind , not downwind as in the normal gravity upward flammability screening Test 1. At low
flow velocities, the concurrent (Test 1 configuration) flame spread was not viable over vertical solid cylinders, while the
[3,4]
stagnation point flame at the bottom end of the cylinder (low stretch flame) was viable . In addition, the maximum
flammability in the upwind spread configuration is known to be at lower imposed flows and lower oxygen
[5]
concentrations than in normal gravity .
[6]

Theoretical predictions by Foutch and T’ien (1987) indicate that it
should be possible to understand a material’s burning characteristics in the
low stretch environment of spacecraft (non-buoyant, but with some
movement induced by fans and crew disturbances) by understanding its
burning characteristics in an equivalent Earth-based stretch environment
[7]
(induced by normal gravity buoyancy). Experimental results demonstrate
-1
the transition from a robust flame at stretch rates of 10-20 s to a quenched
-1
flame at very low stretch (1-2 s ) in air where the stretch rate is purely
buoyant. In these tests, sample radius of curvature was the primary variable
controlling the stretch rate, but this is not convenient for standardized
testing.
Experiment Setup
The ELSA apparatus, shown conceptually in Figure 1, uses a mass-flow
controlled forced-air flow issuing from a 7.5 cm diameter nozzle into the
cone to augment the low buoyant stretch. Stretch rates have been varied in
-1
a prototype facility from purely buoyant (estimated ~ 3.5 s for the 28 cm
-1
Figure 1: Concept of ELSA apparatus,
sample plate) to 33.5 s with forced convection. Cone heat flux has been
2
showing fuel sample suspended above
varied from 10-25 kW/m . Samples are mounted 2.5 cm above the cone,
radiant cone heater and oxidizer flow jet.
which is the same distance as the normal cone configuration.
The enclosure reflects the WSTF Controlled
[1]
Atmosphere Cone Calorimeter facility .
The samples used are 2.4 cm thick PMMA, cut to the standard cone
test sample size of 10 cm x 10 cm exposed surface area, but also have
_______________________________________
* Dr. Sandra L. Olson, Sandra.olson@grc.nasa.gov

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

213

a 2.5 cm lip around the opening to prevent the sample
from falling through the opening. The holder is 0.2 cm
thick stainless steel, 28cm wide.
The test procedure first establishes the cone heat
flux using a heat flux gauge. The low velocity flow is
established and then the sample moved into position to
expose it to this environment. It should be noted that the
net heat flux increases due to the addition of convective
flow. The pilot (hot source or spark) was positioned to
the side of the sample, very near the surface of the plate
to ignite the vapors once a flammable mixture is
obtained. Thermocouples on the surface of the sample
record the surface temperature, video cameras record the
ignition and flame behavior. The air mass flow rate,
radiant flux and cone temperature are recorded as well.
Once burning is established, the flame reaches a
“pseudo-steady state” in approximately 10 seconds.
Because the sample is of intermediate thickness, the
interior continues to heat up throughout the test time, so
true steady state is never obtained.
Equivalent stretch rates can be determined as a
function of gravity, imposed flow, and geometry. For
purely buoyant flow, the equivalent stretch rate is
*
½ [6,7]
, where the density difference
ab = [(De-D )/De] [g/R]
from the average flame temperature to ambient is used, g
is gravity, and R is the radius of curvature of the sample.
For purely forced flow, the equivalent stretch rate is
[6]
characterized by either af= 2U4/R for a cylinder , or
[8]
af=Ujet/djet for a jet impinging on a planar surface . U is
the velocity of the ambient stream or the jet, R is the
radius of curvature of the cylinder, and d is the diameter
of the jet. A generalized expression for stretch rate
which captures mixed convection includes both buoyant
2
2 ½
[6]
and forced stretch is defined as aequivalent = af(1+ ab /af ) .

Figure 2: Linear correlation of flat disk radius with
[7,9]
equivalent buoyant stretch . Regression rates for cylinders
and flat disks were correlated, and the equivalent stretch
rate for the 14 cm radius ELSA holder determined from the
linear relation found between radius of the disk and
equivalent stretch rate.

The contributions of the buoyant stretch on the
equivalent stretch rate were evaluated by correlating
[9]
regression rate data for flat disks of various radii and
[7]
cylindrical samples with reported stretch rates . The
correlation, shown in Figure 2, allows us to determine
s-1
the inherent buoyant stretch for ELSA to be ~3.5 by
matching the regression rates for cylinders and flat disks.
Note that this correlation worked even through the range
of radii where Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities were found
[9]
at larger radii (>8cm) .
Results and Discussion
Ignition
The samples are radiantly ignited with the assistance
of a gas-phase pilot (a hot source or spark) to ignite the
vapors. Ignition of the sample was recorded on video,
and the time to ignition determined for each test condition.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

214

Figure 3 Ignition delay times as a function of equivalent
stretch rate.

2

2

Ignition delay times were measured at 10 kW/m and 25 kW/m flux levels, as shown in Figure 3. For a fixed
radiant flux, ignition delay times are shown to decrease with decreasing stretch rate. The difference between a normal
cone ignition delay time and ignition delay times at very low
stretch is a factor of three, demonstrating that ignition delay
times determined from normal cone tests significantly
overestimate the ignition delay times of materials in
microgravity or in low stretch extraterrestrial environments. In
2
addition, at the 10 kW/m flux level, the ignition delay time at
low stretch approaches the value of the normal cone at
2
25 kW/m , indicating the sensitivity of low stretch flames to even
weak levels of external flux.

Figure 4: Surface temperature histories as a function
2
of stretch rate for 10 kW/m cone heat flux.

Surface temperature was also recorded during tests. Figure
4 shows surface temperature rising as a power law relation once
the sample is exposed to the cone heat flux, as would be
expected for a slab with constant heat flux at the surface.
Ignition is noted by a sudden jump in temperature in each test.
The ignition temperature is defined as the temperature at which
this jump starts. The surface temperatures at ignition decreased
with increasing stretch, and were lower at lower imposed flux
levels, and the slope is similar for both flux levels, reflecting the
effect of the additional convective heat transfer on ignition.

Cellular Instabilities
Due to the flat sample geometry, at low forced stretch
rates, Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities were observed beneath
the sample. These instabilities were not observed for
[7]
curved samples . The instabilities in these tests were
notably worse at higher flux levels, where fuel
vaporization rates are quite vigorous.
Figure 5 shows the decrease in the cellular
instabilities with increasing stretch. The nominal transition
-1
from cellular planar occurs at ~ 8 s .
While the cellular instability is clearly gravity
dependent, its development occurs well after ignition.
Thus ignition delay time and ignition temperature data is
not affected by this instability. The pseudo-steady-state
flame shape is dominated by this instability. It is less clear
whether average burning rates are significantly affected, as
will be discussed below.
Surface Regression
After ignition, samples were allowed to burn for a
period of time in order to obtain information about the
average burning rates of the material. For all stretch rates,
the samples were found to regress uniformly across the
exposed area, which indicates that the Rayleigh-Taylor
cells do not affect the fuel surface regression locally. It is
less clear if the cellular flow field significantly affects the
burning rate in a global sense. Due to the enhanced
convection, the burning rates could be higher than they
would be without the cellular flow. On the other hand,

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

215

Figure 5: Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities are observed at
-1
stretch rates less than ~8 s . These instabilities are due to
the flat samples used in these experiments as well as the
augmented heat flux levels. At low stretch rates, the cells
are very large, and extend into the cone.

they could be lower because of the larger average
standoff distance between the flame and the fuel surface.
Average regression rates, shown in Figure 6, were
obtained by weighing the samples before and after the
test and dividing the mass loss by the test time, exposed
2
area and density ( =1.19 g/cc, A=100 cm ). Regression
rates increase with heat flux and stretch rate, but
regression rates are much more sensitive to heat flux at
the low stretch rates. A modest increase in heat flux of
2
25 kW/m increases the burning rates by an order of
magnitude at the lower stretch rates. These trends are
reasonable for low stretch flames, which have been
shown to be very sensitive to the ratio of heat loss to
[7]
heat generated via combustion .
2

Even at 10 kW/m , the cone heater offsets the surface
radiative loss, which is significant relative to the weak
[7]
heat generation rates . Thus, low stretch flames with
Figure 6 : PMMA regression rates for three levels of
these losses offset may find themselves vaporizing much
imposed heat flux from radiant cone heater, plotted as
more fuel than there is oxygen available with which to
a function of equivalent stretch rate. Data: , ∆ this
[7]
[10]
[8]
react. The products of combustion from such flames will
,
,
.
work,
be more toxic (CO, soot, THC, etc.) in addition to posing a
significant risk of buildup to explosive levels in a confined space.
Conclusions
The Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus (ELSA) uses an inverted cone geometry with the sample burning in a ceiling
fire configuration that allows for low stretch stagnation flow. Ignition delay times and regression rate data have been
measured in a prototype unit.
For a fixed radiant flux, ignition delay times for PMMA are shown to decrease by a factor of three at low stretch,
demonstrating that ignition delay times determined from normal cone tests significantly underestimate the risk in
microgravity.
Regression rates for PMMA increase with heat flux and stretch rate, but regression rates are much more sensitive to
2
heat flux at the low stretch rates, where a modest increase in heat flux of 25 kW/m increases the burning rates by an
order of magnitude.
These results demonstrate the ability of ELSA to simulate key features of low stretch materials flammability
behavior. ELSA provides a new tool to assess microgravity and extraterrestrial fire hazards.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge NASA Glenn engineers Chris Gallo for designing the prototype unit and
Ray Wade for designing the spark ignition system.; summer students Lander Coronado-Garcia and FloJaune Griffin for
conducting many of the prototype experiments; and Jayme Baas and Sarah Smith for their work on the engineering
modifications to the WSTF ELSA apparatus.
References
1) NASA-STD-6001, 1998.
2) McGrattan, K.B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum, H.R., and Olson, S.L.; Combustion and Flame (C&F), V. 106, pp.377-391, 1996.
3) Halli, Y., and T’ien, J.S., NBS-GCR-86-507, Feb. 1986.
4) Ivanov, A.V, et. al, NASA Contract NAS3-97160 final report, Russian Space Agency, Keldysh Research Center, Moscow 1999,
also NASA CP-1999-208917, pp. 47-50.
5) Olson, S.L., Comb. Sci.& Tech. V. 76, pp.233-249, 1991.
6)Foutch, D.W.,& T'ien, J.S., AIAA J.,V.25, No.7,pp.972-6, 1987.
7) Olson, S.L and T’ien, J.S.;C.&F,V.121,pp.439-452, 2000.
8) T'ien, J.S., Singhal, S.N., Harrold, D.P., and Prahl, J.M.; Combustion and Flame, Vol. 33, pp.55-68, 1978.
9) Vantelon, J.P., Himdi, A., and Gaboraiud, F.; Combust. Sci. and Tech., V54, pp. 145-158, 1987.
10) Ohtani, H., Akita, K., and Hirano, T., Combustion and Flame, Vol. 53, pp. 33-40, 1983.

NASA/CP—2003-212376/REV1

216

