Edge Diffusion Flame Propagation and
Stabilization Studied
In most practical combustion systems or fires, fuel and air are initially unmixed, thus
forming diffusion flames. As a result of flame-surface interactions, the diffusion flame
often forms an edge, which may attach to burner walls, spread over condensed fuel
surfaces, jump to another location through the fuel-air mixture formed, or extinguish by
destabilization (blowoff). Flame holding in combustors is necessary to achieve design
performance and safe operation of the system. Fires aboard spacecraft behave differently
from those on Earth because of the absence of buoyancy in microgravity. This ongoing
in-house flame-stability research at the NASA Glenn Research Center is important in
spacecraft fire safety and Earth-bound combustion systems.
Video observations of low-speed fuel jet diffusion flames have been made in normal
Earth-gravity (1g) and in microgravity (µg) at the 2.2-Second Drop Tower at Glenn. The
1g flame was short and narrow, and the flame base was close to the burner rim as a result
of buoyancy-induced flow. Intense blue emissions and a yellow-orange color indicated a
vigorously burning flame zone and soot formation, respectively. By contrast, the µg
flame was spherical and larger as a result of relatively slow fuel and oxygen molecular
diffusion in every direction. The weak burning resulted in lower flame temperatures (thus
reducing soot formation) and in a large quenched space near the burner wall.

Video images of ethane jet diffusion flames in quiescent air. Burner tube inside diameter,
i.d., 2.87 mm; mean fuel jet velocity, 7.5 cm/sec. Left: 1g. Right: µg.
Direct numerical simulations with a detailed reaction mechanism and radiative heat
losses have revealed the flame structure in unsurpassed detail. Unlike previous work,
these computations, which used a reaction mechanism including 33 species and 112
elementary steps, enabled genuine prediction of the flame propagation speed. In the
simulations, a hydrocarbon fuel (methane, ethane, ethylene, acetylene, or propane) was
injected into quasi-quiescent air in 1g or 0g for a short period (0.3 sec) and ignited
downstream on the axis. The calculated flame propagation speed was independent of
gravity and matched well with the stoichiometric laminar flame speed of each fuel.

Temporal variations (from 1 to 200 msec) in the calculated temperature field of a
propagating edge diffusion flame in an ethane jet in quasi-quiescent air in 0g. Burner
tube i.d., 3 mm; mean fuel jet velocity, 6.86 cm/sec.
Computations revealed that a peak reactivity spot (i.e., a reaction kernel) was formed in
the edge diffusion flame as a result of radical (H atom) back-diffusion into the highoxygen-concentration region and subsequent chain-branching reactions. The reaction
kernel in the propagating flame had characteristics of premixed flames in the direction of
propagation. Once the edge diffusion flame attached to the burner rim, its premixed flame
nature was lost because the flammable mixing layer became too narrow for propagation
and its direction even became perpendicular to the incoming flow. Instead, vigorous
reactions at the reaction kernel within an available residence time kept the trailing
diffusion flame from blowoff. The 1g flame was stabilized at relatively high velocities
because the reaction-kernel reactivity increased by "blowing." A linear correlation was
found between the reaction-kernel reactivity and the velocity for each fuel. These new
findings replace a conventional view of diffusion flame attachment based on premixed
flames and may lead to better fire-extinguishing and flame-holding approaches.

Calculated velocity vectors, v; temperature isotherms, T; and heat-release rate contours,
q, in joules per cubic centimeter seconds. Burner tube i.d., 3 mm; mean fuel jet velocity,
6.86 cm/sec. Left: Propagating ethane flame in 0g. Center: Stabilized ethane jet diffusion
flames in quasi-quiescent air in 1g. Right: Stabilized ethane jet diffusion flames in quasiquiescent air in 0g.

References
1. Takahashi, F.; and Katta, V.R.: Reaction Kernel Structure and Stabilizing
Mechanisms of Jet Diffusion Flames in Microgravity. Proc. Combust. Inst., part
2, vol. 29, 2002, pp. 2509-2518.
2. Takahashi, Fumiaki; and Katta, Viswanath R.: Propagation and Structure of Edge
Diffusion Flames in Axisymmetric Hydrocarbon Fuel Jets. Proceedings of the
19th International Colloquium on the Dynamics of Explosions and Reactive
Systems, Hakone, Japan, 2003.
National Center for Microgravity Research contact: Dr. Fumiaki Takahashi, 216-4333778, Fumiaki.Takahashi@grc.nasa.gov
Authors: Dr. Fumiaki Takahashi and Dr. Viswanath R. Katta
Headquarters program office: OBPR
Programs/Projects: Microgravity Science

