Fundamental Research Applied To
Enable Hardware Performance in
Microgravity
NASA sponsors microgravity research to generate knowledge in physical sciences. In
some cases, that knowledge must be applied to enable future research. This article
describes one such example. The Dust and Aerosol measurement Feasibility Test (DAFT)
is a risk-mitigation experiment developed at the NASA Glenn Research Center by NASA
and ZIN Technologies, Inc., in support of the Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment
(SAME). SAME is an investigation that is being designed for operation in the
Microgravity Science Glovebox aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The
purpose of DAFT is to evaluate the performance of P-Trak (TSI Incorporated, Shoreview,
MN)--a commercially available condensation nuclei counter and a key SAME diagnostic-in long-duration microgravity because of concerns about its ability to operate properly in
that environment. If its microgravity performance is proven, this device will advance the
state of the art in particle measurement capabilities for space vehicles and facilities, such
as aboard the ISS.
The P-Trak, a hand-held instrument, can count individual particles as small as 20 nm in
diameter in an aerosol stream. Particles are drawn into the device by a built-in suction
pump. Upon entering the instrument, these particles pass through a saturator tube where
they mix with an alcohol vapor (see the following figure). This mixture then flows
through a cooled condenser tube where some of the alcohol condenses onto the sample
particles, and the droplets grow in a controlled fashion until they are large enough to be
counted. These larger droplets pass through an internal nozzle and past a focused laser
beam, producing flashes of light that are sensed by a photodetector and then counted to
determine particle number concentration. The operation of the instrument depends on the
proper internal flow and recycling of isopropyl alcohol in both the vapor and liquid
phases.

P-Trak internal components and flow.
Long description of figure. Internal components and airflow for the P-Trak, showing pump, focusing
optics, laser diode, photodetector, saturator tube, alcohol-soaked wick, and sample inlet. Also shows a
cross-sectional view of the inner wall of the modified condenser. The precisely machined grooves are
visible.

As the instrument was originally designed, alcohol that condenses on the inner wall of the
condenser drains back down the saturator tube by gravity. The condenser in the unit was
modified to promote the capillary flow of liquid alcohol back toward the saturator
without depending on gravitational forces. This was accomplished through a series of 60
precisely machined grooves, each 0.009 in. deep, which promote the wicking of the
liquid alcohol in the proper direction along the condenser’s inner wall. This design was
developed by fluids physics researchers at Glenn following an analysis to measure the
contact angle of isopropyl alcohol on the aluminum surfaces of the condenser. The
technique for this analysis is based on the results of fundamental research conducted at
Glenn that investigated the wetting properties of liquids on surfaces (ref. 1).
For the DAFT experiment, both a modified and an unmodified version of the P-Trak will
be tested in the long-duration microgravity conditions aboard the ISS. In addition to the
P-Traks, another commercial instrument, the TSI DustTrak, will be utilized with the
experiment. The DustTrak measures particle concentrations and is not sensitive to
gravity. For experiment operations, DAFT will be secured to the front of an Expedite the
Processing of Experiments to Space Station (EXPRESS) Rack and gaseous nitrogen
provided by the rack will be used to fill 15-liter sample bags. These bags also will be
loaded with a small quantity of a characterized source of particulates made up of Arizona
road dust. One of the P-Traks and the DustTrak will then simultaneously draw samples
from these bags while recording measurements of particle counts and mass
concentrations, respectively. Prior to the particulate/nitrogen sample entering the

instruments, the smallest particles will be removed from the flow stream by a device
called the DAFT Impactor, which was designed with the guidance of scientists at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. The EXPRESS laptop computer will be
used to download the recorded measurements from the instruments and downlink them to
the ground. There, they will be compared to quantitatively assess the operation of the PTrak: that is, whether or not the readings of the P-Trak properly correlate to the readings
of the DustTrak. These instruments also will take data from samples of the ISS cabin air.
Environmental Control and Life Support Systems personnel at the NASA Johnson Space
Center and NASA Marshall Space Flight Center have expressed a strong interest in these
measurements since they will provide valuable information regarding particulate loading
in the ISS cabin atmosphere. The DAFT hardware has been formally turned over to
Johnson and awaits shipment to the launch site.

Reference
1. Allen, J.S.: An Analytical Solution for Determination of Small Contact Angles
From Sessile Drops of Arbitrary Size. J. Colloid Interface Sci., vol. 261, 2003, pp.
481–489.
Find out more about this research
http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/combustion/daft/daft_index.htm
Glenn contacts: William A. Sheredy, 216–433–3685, William.A.Sheredy@nasa.gov;
Dr. David L. Urban, 216–433–2835, David.L.Urban@nasa.gov; and Dr. Gary A. Ruff,
216–433–5697, Gary.A.Ruff@nasa.gov
Author: William A. Sheredy
Headquarters program office: Exploration Systems
Programs/Projects: Life Support & Habitation

