Fiber-Supported Droplet Combustion
Experiment-2
A major portion of the energy produced in the world today comes from the burning of
liquid hydrocarbon fuels in the form of droplets. Understanding the fundamental physical
processes involved in droplet combustion is not only important in energy production but
also in propulsion, in the mitigation of combustion-generated pollution, and in the control
of the fire hazards associated with handling liquid combustibles. Microgravity makes
spherically symmetric combustion possible, allowing investigators to easily validate their
droplet models without the complicating effects of gravity. The Fiber-Supported Droplet
Combustion (FSDC-2) investigation was conducted in the Microgravity Glovebox facility
of the shuttles' Spacelab during the reflight of the Microgravity Science Laboratory (MSL1R) on STS-94 in July 1997. FSDC-2 studied fundamental phenomena related to liquid
fuel droplet combustion in air. Pure fuels and mixtures of fuels were burned as isolated
single and duo droplets with and without forced air convection. FSDC-2 is sponsored by
the NASA Lewis Research Center, whose researchers are working in cooperation with
several investigators from industry and academia.
The rate at which a droplet burns is important in many commercial applications. The
classical theory of droplet burning assumes that, for an isolated, spherically symmetric,
single-fuel droplet, the gas-phase combustion processes are much faster than the droplet
surface regression rate and that the liquid phase is at a uniform temperature equal to the
boiling point. Recent, more advanced models predict that both the liquid and gas phases
are unsteady during a substantial portion of the droplet's burning history, thus affecting the
instantaneous and average burning rates, and that flame radiation is a dominant mechanism
that can extinguish flames in a microgravity environment. FSDC-2 has provided welldefined, symmetric droplet burning data including radiative emissions to validate these
theoretical models for heptane, decane, ethanol, and methanol fuels. Since most
commercial combustion systems burn droplets in a convective environment, data were
obtained without and with convective flow over the burning droplet (see the following
photos).

Heptane droplet. Left: Without flow. Right: With flow.
Multicomponent droplet burning studies are motivated by the need to understand the
burning characteristics of blended fuels and liquid hazardous wastes. Depending on the
relative concentrations and volatilities of the components and their miscibility,
multicomponent fuels can exhibit peculiar, unsteady burning characteristics such as the
formation of vapor bubbles in the droplet if the droplet internal temperature exceeds the
bubble nucleation temperature of a fuel component.
The importance of liquid species diffusion in multicomponent droplet burning has also
been recognized. In normal-gravity experiments, buoyancy can destroy the spherical
symmetry by inducing convective mixing in the gas and liquid phases; therefore,
microgravity experiments help to clarify the phenomena occurring during multicomponent
droplet burning. Also, product dissolution can change an initially pure fuel into a
multicomponent fuel, a behavior observed in alcohol fuels when combustion-generated
water is absorbed by the fuel, leading to nonlinear burning. FSDC-2 has provided data on
the burning of methanol/water, ethanol/water, and heptane/hexadecane fuel mixtures.
Most combustion systems involve the burning of many droplets. On FSDC-2, droplet
interactions were investigated with decane fuel with and without convective flow (see the
following photo). Two droplets were placed side by side. The data obtained from the
burning of a single stationary droplet and double droplets is helping researchers
understand and solve physical processes in more complex combustion systems.

Double decane droplets with flow.
Lewis contact: Dr. Vedha Nayagam, (216) 433-8702, Vedha.Nayagam@grc.nasa.gov
Author: Dr. Renato O. Colantonio
Headquarters program office: OLMSA

Programs/Projects: HEDS, Microgravity Science, STS-94, MSL-1R, FSDC-2

