Smoldering News From STS-77
Endeavour

Microgravity Smoldering Combustion fuel sample and test section assembly.
The Microgravity Smoldering Combustion (MSC) experiment lifted off aboard the Space
Shuttle Endeavour for its second flight in May 1996, as part of the STS-77 mission. This
experiment is part of a series of studies focused on the smolder characteristics of porous
combustible materials in a microgravity environment. Smoldering is a nonflaming form of
combustion that takes place in the interior of combustible materials. Common examples of
smoldering are nonflaming embers, charcoal briquettes, and cigarettes.
The objective of this study is to provide a better understanding of the controlling
mechanisms of smoldering in microgravity and normal Earth gravity (1g). As with other
forms of combustion, gravity affects the availability of air and transport of heat, and
therefore, the rate of combustion. The results of the microgravity experiments will be
compared with identical ones carried out in 1g. In addition, they will be used to verify
present theories of smolder combustion and will provide new insights into the process of
smoldering combustion, enhancing our fundamental understanding of this frequently
encountered combustion process and guiding improvements in fire safety practices.
Two smoldering combustion tests with polyurethane foam were successfully accomplished
during the STS-77 mission. The tests investigated smoldering combustion in a quiescent
(no-flow) enriched oxygen environment, and in an air environment with a 2-mm/sec
airflow through the fuel sample. The primary data from the tests are the ignition
characteristics, spread rate, smolder reaction temperature, and products of combustion
(solid and gas).
On both the first mission on STS-69 and the second mission on STS-77, a smolder front
propagated the length of the forced-flow samples, with the spread rate between the
corresponding upward and downward 1g smolder rates. Neither of the quiescent cases

propagated combustion (the first case was due in part to a problem with the experiment
electronics). These results show a dramatic difference from the normal gravity results,
where smolder propagation is very rapid and complete for both of these conditions.
The experiment was conceived by Prof. A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello at the University of
California-Berkeley. The MSC hardware was designed and built at the NASA Lewis
Research Center by a team of civil servants and contractors from NYMA, Inc., and
Aerospace Design & Fabrication, Inc. (ADF). The hardware consists of two sealed
aluminum combustion chambers (each being a half a cylinder). The chambers hold the
MSC test section, data acquisition electronics, power distribution electronics, and
instrumentation. The hardware is fitted into a 5-ft3 Get-Away-Special (GAS) canister that
is mounted in the shuttle cargo bay. The test section (shown in the figure) consists of a
quartz cylinder that contains the polyurethane foam sample and an igniter. This igniter,
which is an electrically heated wire sandwiched between two porous ceramic disks, is
mounted in contact with the end of the foam sample. An array of 12 thermocouples placed
axially and radially along the foam sample provide temperature histories, which are used to
determine the rate of smolder propagation, and the characteristics of the reaction.
Lewis contact: John M. Koudelka, (216) 433-2852, John.Koudelka@grc.nasa.gov
Authors: John M. Koudelka and Prof. A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello
Headquarters program office: OLMSA (MSAD)

