Combustion Module-2 Achieved Scientific
Success on Shuttle Mission STS-107
The familiar teardrop shape of a candle is caused by hot, spent air rising and cool fresh
air flowing behind it. This type of airflow obscures many of the fundamental processes of
combustion and is an impediment to our understanding and modeling of key combustion
controls used for manufacturing, transportation, fire safety, and pollution. Conducting
experiments in the microgravity environment onboard the space shuttles eliminates these
impediments. NASA Glenn Research Center's Combustion Module-2 (CM-2) and its
three experiments successfully flew on STS-107/Columbia in the SPACEHAB module
and provided the answers for many research questions. However, this research also
opened up new questions.
The CM-2 facility was the largest and most complex pressurized system ever flown by
NASA and was a precursor to the Glenn Fluids and Combustion Facility planned to fly
on the International Space Station. CM-2 operated three combustion experiments:
Laminar Soot Processes (LSP), Structure of Flame Balls at Low Lewis-Number
(SOFBALL), and Water Mist Fire Suppression Experiment (Mist). Although Columbia's
mission ended in tragedy with the loss of her crew and much data, most of the CM-2
results were sent to the ground team during the mission.

CM-2 systems and software engineers conduct final inspections of the CM-2 flight
hardware at Glenn before it is shipped to the launch site.
The LSP experiment studied the formation of soot in flames so that methods for
controlling soot can be devised to eliminate or mitigate significant public health problems
caused by emissions of pollutant soot (e.g., soot causes 60,000 premature deaths per
year). Observations of the LSP flames made during the Columbia flight were very
successful, and the LSP results have already suggested new ways to reduce, and possibly
even eliminate, emissions of pollutant soot from flames.

This LSP flame, which is an ethylene fuel burning in air at atmospheric pressure, is the
longest laminar flame ever burned in microgravity.
The objective of the SOFBALL experiment was to study weakly burning hydrogen and
methane flames in oxygen-inert mixtures, resulting in "flame balls." Because flame balls
are steady, symmetric, and occur in fuels with simple chemistry, they represent the
simplest possible interaction of chemistry and transport in flames. The accomplishments
of the experiment included (1) the weakest and leanest flames ever burned (0.5 W of
thermal power and only 8 percent of the fuel usually needed for chemical balance) and
(2) the longest-lived flame ever burned in space (81 min). Several totally new and
unexpected results were found, including oscillating flame balls and flame balls drifting
in a spiral or corkscrew pattern. The data obtained during the mission will help lead to the
development of cleaner, more fuel-efficient engines as well as improved methods for
assuring spacecraft fire safety.

One of these nine color-enhanced SOFBALL flame balls burned for 81 min and set a new
record for combustion in space.
The Mist experiment was motivated by the need to find a fire-extinguishing agent that
would replace traditional chemical fire suppressants (halons), which have been banned
because of their harmful effects to the ozone layer. Water mist, very small droplets like a
fine fog, is a nontoxic, inexpensive, and efficient technology to replace halons while
minimizing property damage. The results from the Mist experiment have provided crucial
understanding of the physical and chemical mechanisms of how fine water droplets
interact with and suppress flames. For example, small droplet sizes are consistently more
effective for lean flame suppression than larger droplets. The results will be provided to
manufacturers of fire suppression equipment to design the next generation of fire
extinguishers that will be used in enclosed spaces such as airplanes, ships, libraries,
museums, and residential homes. Water mist may also become a viable fire suppression
system onboard orbiting spacecraft, such as the International Space Station.

The sequence of two color-enhanced Mist propane flames shows a smooth, hemispherical

flame in dry air, followed by a multilobed broken flame resulting from the interaction
with the fine water mist.
Find out more about this research at http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/combustion/
Glenn contacts: Ann P. Over, 216-433-6535, Ann.P.Over@nasa.gov; David T. Frate,
216-433-8329, David.T.Frate@nasa.gov; and Dr. David L. Urban, 216-433-2835,
David.L.Urban@nasa.gov
Author: Ann P. Over
Headquarters program office: OBPR
Programs/Projects: Microgravity Combustion Science, Chemically Reacting Systems,
Combustion Module-2

