Radiative Enhancement Effects on Flame
Spread (REEFS) Project Studied “Green
House” Effects on Fire Spread
The Radiative Enhancement Effects on Flame Spread (REEFS) project, slated for flight
aboard the International Space Station, reached a major milestone by holding its Science
Concept Review this year. REEFS is led by principal investigator Paul Ronney from the
University of Southern California in conjunction with a project team from the NASA
Glenn Research Center. The study is focusing on flame spread over flat solid fuel beds to
improve our understanding of more complex fires, such as those found in manned
spacecraft and terrestrial buildings. The investigation has direct implications for fire safety,
both for space and Earth applications, and extends previous work with emphasis on the
atmospheres and flow environments likely to be present in fires that might occur in
microgravity. These atmospheres will contain radiatively active gases such as carbon
dioxide (CO2) from combustion products, and likely gaseous fuels such as carbon
monoxide (CO) from incomplete combustion of solid fuel, as well as flows induced by
ventilation currents.
During tests in the 2.2-Second Drop Tower and KC-135 aircraft at Glenn, the principal
investigator introduced the use of foam fuels for flame spread experiments over thermally
thick fuels to obtain large spread rates in comparison to those of dense fuels such as
PMMA. This enables meaningful results to be obtained even in the 2.2 s available in drop
tower experiments.

Front-view image of flame spread over a thick, 10-cm-wide solid fuel bed. Flame spreads
toward the bottom of the image. The bright band in the lower part of the images is the
flame front; the upper bright band is from the ignition source. Top: Microgravity.
Bottom: Earth gravity.
Thick-fuel flame spread experiments using foam fuels gave indications that, in contrast to
conventional understanding, steady spread can occur over thick fuels even in quiescent
microgravity environments, especially when a radiatively active diluent gas such as CO2 is
employed, as the principal investigator had hypothesized. As with thin fuels, the spread
rates at microgravity can even exceed those at Earth gravity when a radiatively active
diluent gas is used. Measurements of radiative emission from O2/CO2 atmosphere tests in
microgravity revealed that there is substantial emission, absorption, and reemission.
Hence, it was shown that the faster flame spread rates are due to radiative transfer from

the flame to the unburned fuel surface (the "green house" effect) and that this heat transfer
enhancement can lead to steady spread even when conductive heat transfer from the flame
to the fuel bed is negligible.
These findings are particularly noteworthy considering that the International Space Station
employs CO2 fire extinguishers; the results suggest that helium may be a better fire
suppressant/extinguishing agent on both mass and mole bases in microgravity even though
CO2 is much better on a mole basis in Earth gravity.
REEFS plans to use the FEANICS (Flow Enclosure Accommodating Novel Investigations
in Combustion of Solids) insert that will go into the Combustion Integrated Rack facility
on the International Space Station. FEANICS is a generically designed flow tunnel for
solid fuel and spacecraft fire safety combustion experiments conducted by several
investigators.
Glenn contact: Dr. Suleyman Gokoglu, 216-433-5499, Suleyman.A.Gokoglu@nasa.gov
Authors: Dr. Suleyman A. Gokoglu and Prof. Paul Ronney
Headquarters program office: OBPR
Programs/Projects: Microgravity Science, REEFS

