Carbon Dioxide Dispersion in the
Combustion Integrated Rack Simulated
Numerically
When discharged into an International Space Station (ISS) payload rack, a carbon dioxide
(CO2) portable fire extinguisher (PFE) must extinguish a fire by decreasing the oxygen in
the rack by 50 percent within 60 sec. The length of time needed for this oxygen reduction
throughout the rack and the length of time that the CO2 concentration remains high
enough to prevent the fire from reigniting is important when determining the
effectiveness of the response and postfire procedures. Furthermore, in the absence of
gravity, the local flow velocity can make the difference between a fire that spreads
rapidly and one that self-extinguishes after ignition.
A numerical simulation of the discharge of CO2 from PFE into the Combustion
Integrated Rack (CIR) in microgravity was performed to obtain the local velocity and
CO2 concentration. The complicated flow field around the PFE nozzle exits was modeled
by sources of equivalent mass and momentum flux at a location downstream of the
nozzle. The time for the concentration of CO2 to reach a level that would extinguish a fire
anywhere in the rack was determined using the Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS), a
computational fluid dynamics code developed by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology specifically to evaluate the development of a fire and smoke transport. The
simulation shows that CO2, as well as any smoke and combustion gases produced by a
fire, would be discharged into the ISS cabin through the resource utility panel at the
bottom of the rack (green region at the bottom of the CIR as shown in the figure on the
right). These simulations will be validated by comparing the results with velocity and
CO2 concentration measurements obtained during the fire suppression system verification
tests conducted on the CIR in March 2003.

CO2 after 8 sec of discharge from a PFE in the front section of the CIR. Left: Velocity.
Right: Molar fraction.
Long description. The front of the CIR has been removed to allow visualization. Nine distinctive jets are

used to model the PFE discharge (eight radial jets and one into the rack). The simulation shows that carbon
dioxide is discharged into the ISS open volume through the resource utility panel at the bottom of the rack
(green region).

Once these numerical simulations are validated, portions of the ISS labs and living areas
will be modeled to determine the local flow conditions before, during, and after a fire
event. These simulations can yield specific information about how long it takes for smoke
and combustion gases produced by a fire to reach a detector location, how large the fire
would be when the detector alarms, and the behavior of the fire until it has been
extinguished. This new capability could then be used to optimize the location of fire
detectors and fire-suppression ports as well as to evaluate the effectiveness of fire
suppressants and response strategies. Numerical data collected from these simulations
could also be used to develop a virtual reality fire event for crew training and fire safety
awareness.
This work is funded by NASA's Bioastronautics Initiative, which has the objective of
ensuring and enhancing the health, safety, and performance of humans in space. As part
of this initiative, the Microgravity Combustion Science Branch at the NASA Glenn
Research Center is conducting spacecraft fire safety research to significantly improve fire
safety on inhabited spacecraft.
Find out more about this research at http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/combustion/
National Center for Microgravity Research contact: Dr. Ming-Shin Wu, 216-4333781, Ming-Shin.Wu@grc.nasa.gov
Glenn contact: Dr. Gary A. Ruff, 216-433-5697, Gary.A.Ruff@nasa.gov
Authors: Drs. Gary A. Ruff and Ming-Shin Wu
Headquarters program office: OBPR
Programs/Projects: Microgravity Science

