Microgravity Smoldering Combustion
Takes Flight
The Microgravity Smoldering Combustion (MSC) experiment lifted off aboard the Space
Shuttle Endeavour in September 1995 on the STS-69 mission. This experiment is part of a
series of studies focused on the smolder characteristics of porous, combustible materials in
a microgravity environment. Smoldering is a nonflaming form of combustion that takes
place in the interior of combustible materials. Common examples of smoldering are
nonflaming embers, charcoal briquettes, and cigarettes.
The objective of the study is to provide a better understanding of the controlling
mechanisms of smoldering, both in microgravity and Earth gravity. As with other forms of
combustion, gravity affects the availability of air and the transport of heat, and therefore,
the rate of combustion. Results of the microgravity experiments will be compared with
identical experiments carried out in Earth's gravity. They also will be used to verify present
theories of smoldering combustion and will provide new insights into the process of
smoldering combustion, enhancing our fundamental understanding of this frequently
encountered combustion process and guiding improvement in fire safety practices.
In the Microgravity Smoldering Combustion experiment during STS-69, two tests were
conducted to investigate the spread of smolder along a sample of polyurethane foam (120mm diameter by 140-mm long) under two experimental conditions: (1) in a still
environment of 35 percent oxygen/65 percent nitrogen and (2) in an opposing air flow (1mm/sec flowing through the foam in the direction opposite to that of the smolder
propagation). Each combustion test was conducted in a 20-liter sealed chamber that was
instrumented to obtain pressure, temperature, and video data. The flight data have been
obtained and are being analyzed by the principal investigator.
Polyurethane foam was selected as the fuel sample because it is representative of materials
commonly used on Earth and in space-based facilities. The environmental conditions are
part of a matrix of planned experiments in a nonconvective environment with oxygen
concentrations higher than in air and in a convective environment with velocities similar to
those that can be expected from the ventilating system in space facilities.

Microgravity Smoldering Combustion fuel sample and test section assembly.
The experiment was conceived by Professor A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello at the University
of California at Berkeley. The hardware, which was designed and built at the NASA Lewis
Research Center by a mixed team of civil servants and contractors from NYMA and
Aerospace Design & Fabrication, Inc. (ADF), consists of two sealed aluminum
combustion chambers (each one a half cylinder), data acquisition electronics, power
distribution electronics, and instrumentation. The hardware is contained a 5-ft^3 GetAway Special (GAS) canister and flown in the shuttle cargo bay. The chambers hold the
MSC test section (fuel sample) and its temperature and pressure instrumentation. The test
section (shown in the figure) consists of a quartz cylinder that contains the polyurethane
foam sample and an igniter. This igniter, which is an electrically heated wire sandwiched
between two porous ceramic disks, is mounted in contact with the end of the foam sample.
An array of 12 thermocouples placed axially and radially along the foam sample provides
temperature histories, which are used to determine the rate of smolder propagation and
the characteristics of the reaction.

