Experiments Developed to Study
Microgravity Smoldering Combustion
The overall objective of the Microgravity Smoldering Combustion (MSC) research
program is to understand and predict smoldering combustion under normal and
microgravity (near-zero-gravity) conditions to help prevent and control smolder-originated
fires, in both environments. Smoldering is defined as a nonflaming, self-sustaining,
propagating, exothermic surface reaction. If a material is sufficiently permeable,
smoldering is not confined to its outer surface, but can propagate as a reaction wave
through the interior of the material. The MSC program will accomplish its goals by
conducting smolder experiments on the ground and in a space-based laboratory, and
developing theoretical models of the process. Space-based experiments are necessary
because smoldering is a very slow process and, consequently, its study in a microgravity
environment requires extended periods of time that can only be achieved in space.
Smoldering can occur in a variety of processes ranging from the smolder of porous
insulating materials to underground coal combustion. Many materials can sustain
smoldering, including wood, cloth, foams, tobacco, other dry organic materials, and
charcoal. The ignition, propagation, transition to flaming, and extinction of the smolder
reaction are controlled by complex, thermochemical mechanisms that are not well
understood. As with many forms of combustion, gravity affects the availability of the
oxidizer and the transport of heat, and therefore, the rate of combustion.
The smoldering combustion of porous materials has been studied both experimentally and
theoretically, usually in the context of fire safety. Smoldering encompasses a number of
fundamental processes, including heat and mass transfer in a porous media; endothermic
pyrolysis of combustible material; ignition, propagation, and extinction of heterogeneous
exothermic reactions at the solid-gas pore interface; and the onset of gas phase reactions
(flaming) from existing surface reactions. Smoldering presents a serious fire risk because
the combustion can propagate slowly in a material's interior and go undetected for long
periods of time. It typically yields a substantially higher conversion of fuel to toxic
compounds than does flaming (though more slowly), and may undergo a sudden transition
to flaming.

Microgravity smoldering combustion. Left: After modification. Right: Before
modification.
Common examples of smoldering hazards are the initiation of forest fires by smoldering
embers and of building fires from undetected smoldering in packing material insulation and
furniture cushioning. Various studies since the early 1970's have shown that more than 40
percent of U.S. fire deaths can be attributed to smoldering household furniture. Smolder
of cable insulation, another common fire hazard, is of particular concern in the space
program--to date there have been a few minor incidents of overheated and charred cables
and electrical components reported on space shuttle flights. Recently, with the
establishment of the International Space Station and other planned space facilities, there
has been an increased interest in the study of smoldering in microgravity to prevent or
minimize the effect of a smolder-initiated fire.
The complexity of the smolder process requires the use of approximations in theoretical
models and simplifications in experiments. The removal of gravity substantially simplifies
smolder investigations because the influence of buoyancy on the heat and mass transport
processes is removed. Instabilities induced by density stratification and problems related to
sedimentation and collapse of the porous fuel and char are absent in microgravity.
Furthermore, such experiments as well as a complementary theoretical foundation are
necessary to assess the fire risk of a space-based installation.
The MSC investigation is being led by Professor A.C. Fernandez-Pello, the principal
investigator, of the University of California at Berkeley. Dr. David L. Urban, of the NASA
Glenn Research Center, is the project scientist. Two flight units have been built at Glenn
by a team of civil servants and contractors, and have flown on the space shuttle: one on
STS-69 and one on STS-77. The smoldering test material on both flights was unretarded
urethane furniture foam. Each unit contained two test sections. Unit one had one test
section with opposed (to the direction of burn) flow, and one with quiescent conditions.
Unit two tested another opposed case (a different flow rate), and another quiescent case,
the latter at higher oxygen content.
All tests were with oxygen-nitrogen mixtures. On the basis of these results, the project

improved the smolder tracking system for reflight. The first units employed a video
system, but the data were not as useful in low gravity as in Earth gravity. However, the
experiment was able to track the combustion progress because the fuel sample included 10
thermocouples that provide an axial and radial temperature history of the smolder
propagation. The modified units use an ultrasonic imaging system (UIS), which was
developed and tested by the Glenn team. The UIS uses arrays of speakers and receivers on
opposite sides of the foam test piece test sections to track the progress of the flame front.
The original hardware design used a clear quartz cylinder to hold the foam fuel test sample
to permit imaging of the smolder process, but this material is brittle and not amenable to
the machining necessary to mount the speakers and receivers. After much searching and
testing, the team located a polyimide resin material that could both withstand the high
temperatures and had the toughness to be machined to the necessary tolerances. In
addition to the UIS, the reflight experiment hardware comprises the main structure, two
aluminum combustion chambers, an igniter power unit, a common igniter, two flow
systems to deliver the oxidizer gas mixture, a battery, a data acquisition and control
system, and a power control unit. Other hardware improvements, especially to the oxidizer
gas delivery system, have been incorporated in the latest MSC reflight design. The first
unit has been completed, and the second is now in the final testing process. Both are in
line to fly on the shuttle as "Get-Away-Specials," as did the previous units. The
experiments are based on what was learned on the previous flights. They are opposed and
forward flows on the first reflight payload, and forward flows and quiescent conditions on
the second, with changes in various parameters. It is expected that the results of these
studies will provide new insights into the mechanisms involved in the smoldering process
and result in specific recommendations for reducing the risk of fires both on Earth and in
space.
Glenn contact: Franklin Vergilii, 216-433-6733, Fax 216-433-8050,
Franklin.Vergilii@grc.nasa.gov
Author: Franklin Vergilii
Headquarters program office: OBPR
Programs/Projects: Microgravity Science

