Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28, 2000/pp. 2843–2849

FLAME SPREAD ALONG FREE EDGES OF THERMALLY THIN
SAMPLES IN MICROGRAVITY
W. E. MELL,1 S. L. OLSON2 and T. KASHIWAGI3
1

Chemical and Fuels Engineering Department
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
2
Microgravity Combustion Science Branch
NASA Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, OH 44135, USA
3
Building and Fire Research Laboratory
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA

The effects of imposed ﬂow velocity on ﬂame spread along open edges of a thermally thin cellulosic
sample in microgravity were studied experimentally and theoretically. In this study, the sample was ignited
locally at the middle of the 4 cm wide sample, and subsequent ﬂame spread reached both open edges of
the sample along the direction of the ﬂow. The following ﬂame behaviors were observed in the experiments
and predicted by the numerical calculation, in order of increased imposed ﬂow velocity: (1) ignition but
subsequent ﬂame spread was not attained, (2) ﬂame spread upstream (opposed mode) without any downstream ﬂame, and (3) the upstream ﬂame and two separate downstream ﬂames traveled along the two
open edges (concurrent mode). Generally, the upstream and downstream edge ﬂame spread rates were
faster than the central ﬂame spread rate for an imposed ﬂow velocity of up to 5 cm/s. This was due to
greater oxygen supply from the outer free stream to the edge ﬂames and more efﬁcient heat transfer from
the edge ﬂames to the sample surface than the central ﬂames. For the upstream edge ﬂame, ﬂame spread
rate was nearly independent of, or decreased gradually with, the imposed ﬂow velocity. The spread rate
of the downstream edge, however, increased signiﬁcantly with the imposed ﬂow velocity.

Introduction
Fire safety precautions will be especially vital for
the longer duration and increasingly complex space
missions in the future International Space Station
and the planned manned ﬂight mission to Mars
(three years). For this reason, many ﬂame spread
experiments over combustible solid surfaces have
been conducted in microgravity environments: for
example, over a thermally thin cellulosic sample with
external ﬂows [1,2]; at various ambient pressures in
a quiescent environment [3,4]; in a three-dimensional spread pattern from a localized spot ignition
[5]; and over a thermally thick polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) sample in quiescent, high oxygen
concentration environments [6,7]. All these experiments were conducted over the center part of the
sample to avoid the effects of the sample edges as
much as possible. However, limited published studies on ﬂame spread along thin sample edges in normal gravity have shown that ﬂame spread rate along
free edges tends to be faster than that along the center of the sample [8,9]. Since faster ﬂame spread rate
means more rapid ﬁre growth, measurements of
spread rates along free edges in microgravity are

needed. A slow external ﬂow, which simulates ventilation ﬂow in a spacecraft and the Space Station,
has signiﬁcant effects on ﬂame spread in microgravity [1,2,10]. Thus, the focus of this paper is to determine the effects of a slow imposed ﬂow on both
ﬂame spread behavior and spread rate along free
edges in microgravity and to understand their controlling mechanisms.

Flight Hardware
Flame spread experiments were performed in the
Space Shuttle during the STS-75 USMP-3 mission.
The Radiative Ignition and Transition to Spread Investigation (RITSI) ﬂight hardware was used within
the Shuttle middeck Glovebox facility and consisted
of a small duct test section (8.5 cm wide ‫ 5.9 ן‬cm
high ‫ 1.71 ן‬cm long) through which fan-drawn air
ﬂow passed smoothly at speeds from 0 to 6.5 cm/s
in the lengthwise direction. The estimate of uncertainty of the ﬂow velocity was ‫ 5.0ע‬cm/s based on
the calibration data and the accuracy of a low-velocity hot wire. Samples were 4 cm wide by 10 cm long
sheets of ashless ﬁlter paper (area density of 0.0077

2843

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

Report Documentation Page

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information,
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington
VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it
does not display a currently valid OMB control number.

1. REPORT DATE

2. REPORT TYPE

04 AUG 2000

3. DATES COVERED

N/A

-

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER

Flame Spread Along Free Edges of Thermally Thin Samples in
Microgravity.

5b. GRANT NUMBER
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER

6. AUTHOR(S)

5d. PROJECT NUMBER
5e. TASK NUMBER
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

Chemical and Fuels Engineering Department University of Utah Salt
Lake City, UT 84112, USA
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S)
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT
NUMBER(S)

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Approved for public release, distribution unlimited
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

See also ADM001790, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, Volume 28. Held in Edinburgh, Scotland
on 30 July-4 August 2000., The original document contains color images.
14. ABSTRACT
15. SUBJECT TERMS
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:

17. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

a. REPORT

b. ABSTRACT

c. THIS PAGE

unclassified

unclassified

unclassified

18. NUMBER
OF PAGES

UU

19a. NAME OF
RESPONSIBLE PERSON

7

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18

2844

FIRE—Ignition and Flame Spread

Fig. 1. Time sequence of images from two experiments
(not constant time intervals): on the left is a 2 cm/s air ﬂow
test, and on the right is a 3.5 cm/s air ﬂow test. Flow is
from right to left. Sample width is 4 cm. Grid on sample
surface is 1 cm square.

g/cm2). The sample was installed in the center of
the duct. The long edges of the sample were exposed
to air. Ignition was initiated at the center of the sample instead of the edges, as shown in Fig. 1a, by
radiation from a near-infrared tungsten/halogen
lamp recessed in the duct wall. About a 1 cm circular
area of the center part of the sample was blackened
to enhance absorption of the incident radiation from
the lamp. The radiant ﬂux distribution was Gaussian
with a peak ﬂux of 10 kW/m2 and a 1/e2 (half width)
radius of about 0.5 cm. Red light-emitting diodes
were used to illuminate the sample surface so the
dim blue ﬂame could still be visible.
Experimental Results
As a part of the series of space experiments, four
tests were conducted to examine the ﬂame spread
along free edges with slow external ﬂows. Fig. 1
shows a sequence of video images from two of the
tests. Ignition was initiated at the circular, blackened
center, and transition to ﬂame spread occurred in all
directions except downstream. At the external ﬂow
velocities tested in this study, oxygen supply to the

ﬂame front was the rate controlling process, and
downstream ﬂame spread did not occur due to a lack
of oxygen by virtue of its consumption by the upstream ﬂame (oxygen shadow effect) [5]. In Fig. 1b,
blue ﬂame fronts reached both free edges of the
sample. There were slight differences in the ﬂame
size between the upper and lower sample halves in
the images because the time for the ﬂame front to
reach each free edge was slightly different. At 2 cm/
s ﬂow velocity, the ﬂame did not spread appreciably
downstream either along the free edges (edge ﬂame
spread) or the center part of the sample (central
ﬂame spread). The upstream ﬂame fronts along the
free edges were well ahead of that in the center part
of the sample as seen from the concave char pattern
shown in the left side of Fig. 1c–e. At 3.5 cm/s, however, ﬂames did spread downstream along the free
edges. Eventually, the upstream ﬂame reached the
end of the sample and became smaller (Fig. 1e–f).
As the upstream ﬂame shrank, decreasing its oxygen
consumption, its oxygen shadow effect was reduced.
This allowed the downstream edge ﬂames to spread
toward the center where they eventually met to form
a continuous downstream spreading ﬂame. This is
consistent with the previously observed behavior of
no downstream ﬂame spread in the presence of upstream ﬂame spread on samples without free edges
in air velocities up to 6.5 cm/s [10].
The edge ﬂame front positions in both upstream
and downstream directions were tracked from the
video images. When the ﬂame front reached the free
edges, a sudden, rapid ﬂame spread occurred. However, the edge ﬂame spread rates were reasonably
steady after the initial acceleration in both upstream
and downstream directions. The edge ﬂame spread
rates, determined from the slopes of the nearly
straight-line part of the plots, are shown in Fig. 2 as
a function of external air ﬂow velocity. The upstream
edge ﬂame spread rate decreases slightly with an increase in external ﬂow velocity. This trend is signiﬁcantly different from that of the upstream central
ﬂame spread rate, which signiﬁcantly increases with
external ﬂow velocity in this range of velocities.
However, these edge ﬂames are propagating much
faster than a normal-gravity, downward, free-edge
ﬂame over the same sample, which propagates at
approximately 0.13 cm/s against buoyancy-induced
air ﬂow. This suggests that edge ﬂame spread rate
would continue to decrease gradually with external
ﬂow velocity above 5 cm/s. However, downstream
edge ﬂame spread rate increases rapidly with an increase in external ﬂow velocity.
To provide a perspective on edge ﬂame spreading
relative to central ﬂame spreading, the edge ﬂame
spread rates were normalized by the central ﬂame
spread rates obtained from the samples without the
free edges. The upstream and downstream central
ﬂame spread rates at each ﬂow were used to normalize the upstream and downstream edge ﬂame

EDGE FLAME SPREAD IN MICROGRAVITY

Fig. 2. The experimentally obtained relationship between edge ﬂame spread rate and imposed ﬂow velocity.
Positive imposed ﬂow velocity indicates the opposed ﬂow
condition and, therefore, an upstream ﬂame spread conﬁguration; negative imposed ﬂow velocity indicates the downstream ﬂame spread (concurrent ﬂow condition). Solid circles are in a 1g environment. The symbol X means no
spread. The insert is normalized edge ﬂame spread rate by
central ﬂame spread rate for downstream and upstream
directions, respectively.

2845

Arrhenius rate was used. The same values for the
kinetic constants of the gas phase and the condensed
phase have been used in our previous theoretical
studies [5,10,12]. Ignition was initiated by an external radiant ﬂux on the sample surface. The sample
was assumed to be thermally thin, and radiative heat
losses from the surface were included. However, radiative heat transfer from ﬂame to the sample was
not signiﬁcant for thermally thin samples [7], and
also, the color of edge ﬂames shown in Fig. 1 was
blue. Therefore, radiative transfer from ﬂame was
not included.
There were two assumed symmetry planes. One
was parallel to the plane of the sample passing
through its center; the other was perpendicular to
the plane of the sample, passing through the sample
centerline parallel to its long axis. Thus, the threedimensional simulation code [5,12] solved the conservation equations for ﬂame spread along half a 4
cm by 10 cm sample enclosed in a 13 cm long ‫4 ן‬
cm wide ‫ 5 ן‬cm tall rectangular computational volume. About 400,000 grid points (192 ‫)23 ן 46 ן‬
were used in the calculation. Cell sizes were 0.66
mm parallel to the sample and were increased from
0.25 mm at the sample surface to 2 mm at the top
of the computational domain.

Theoretical Results
spread rates at the corresponding ﬂow velocity, respectively. The normal gravity downward edge ﬂame
spread rate was also normalized by the normal gravity downward central ﬂame spread rate. As seen in
the insert of Fig. 2, at low velocities the upstream
edge ﬂames spread faster than the upstream central
ﬂame. However, as imposed ﬂow velocity increases,
the oxygen supply to the central ﬂame becomes sufﬁcient and the upstream central ﬂame spreads at the
same rate as the upstream edge ﬂame. This would
be a minimum normalized upstream edge ﬂame
spread rate, because at normal gravity the normalized downward spreading edge ﬂames are again faster than the central downward propagating ﬂame.
The downstream normalized edge ﬂame spread rate
increases rapidly with imposed ﬂow, due to enhancements in both oxygen supply and convective heating.

Theoretical Model
Since a more detailed description of the mathematical model has been given in Refs. [10,11], only
a brief summary is given here. The gas phase was
formulated with the conservation equations of mass,
full Navier-Stokes form of the momentum (without
gravity), energy, and species (fuel and oxygen) under
the low Mach number limit. A global one-step reaction (fuel gas) ‫ ם‬vO2 (oxygen) → product with an

The calculation indicated that ignition was observed with air, but subsequent ﬂame spread from
the localized ignition was not attained with the kinetic constants and the material properties described above. However, the objective of the study
was not necessarily to duplicate experimental results
exactly by manipulating the model parameters, but
rather to deduce trends of the phenomena. Therefore, calculations were made at higher oxygen concentrations of 29% and 33%. The calculated sequences of the ﬂame images, similar to the
experimental one shown in Fig. 1, are shown in Fig.
3. The bottom half of each sequence is a plot of the
isosurface of the gas-phase reaction rate (5 ‫5מ01 ן‬
g/cm3s), which is chosen to represent a ﬂame shape.
The upper half of each sequence is fuel concentration at one grid cell above the sample surface (at 0.28
mm); the arrows in the bottom half are oxygen mass
ﬂux vectors. Here, discussion focuses on the ﬂame
shape; fuel and oxygen ﬁelds are discussed later.
Shortly after ignition, the ﬂame is more or less circular and is slightly extended upstream (Fig. 3a) as
in the experimental case of Fig. 1a. Later, the ﬂame
spreads to both open edges (Fig. 3b) and starts to
spread both upstream and downstream, but still as
one continuous ﬂame. For the case of 29% oxygen,
the size of the downstream ﬂame along the open
edge is relatively small due to less oxygen supply
(note length of oxygen mass ﬂux vectors). At later

2846

FIRE—Ignition and Flame Spread

Fig. 3. Two calculated sequence
images of fuel mass fraction (upper
half of each sequence) and isosurface
of gas-phase reaction rate (5 ‫5מ01 ן‬
g/cm3s) with net oxygen mass ﬂux
vectors (lower half of each sequence)
at an imposed ﬂow velocity of 2 cm/
s. Fig. 3c includes the calculated
char fraction contours of the sample
in the lower half of both sequences.
The sequence of 29% oxygen concentration is calculated with a 2 cm
wide sample compared to a 4 cm
wide sample in 33% oxygen concentration. The time sequence is at
(a) 2.5 s, (b) 6 s, and (c) 10 s for the
29% oxygen and is at 5 s, 8 s, and 11
s for 33% oxygen. Flow is from right
to left. Grid lines are 1 cm spaced.

Fig. 4. The calculated relation between downstream and
upstream edge ﬂamefront locations in 33% oxygen concentration at various imposed velocities. Localized ignition is
initiated at 0 cm.

times (Fig. 3c), in 33% oxygen concentration, the
ﬂame separates into three different zones; one
spreads upstream and two separate ﬂames spread
downstream along open edges. The upstream ﬂame
spreads faster along open edges than over the center
part. However, in 29% oxygen concentration, the
downstream ﬂame does not propagate either along
the open edges or the center part. Overall trends
shown in Fig. 3 are very similar to those shown in
Fig. 1d.

The calculated results of the edge ﬂamefront location with respect to time from the beginning of
external radiation in 33% oxygen concentration are
shown in Fig. 4. The plots are qualitatively very similar to the experimental data. The edge ﬂame spread
starts earlier as the imposed ﬂow velocity increases
due to faster lateral ﬂame spread to the edges. Also,
the starting locations of the edge ﬂames shift upstream with decreasing imposed ﬂow velocity. An
initial acceleration in the edge ﬂame spread occurs,
followed by a nearly steady (linear) spread for 2 cm/
s and 3 cm/s imposed ﬂows. For 1 cm/s imposed
ﬂow, the downstream edge ﬂame spread rate did not
reach a steady state with the sample size used in this
study. For longer samples, it is possible that this
ﬂame might extinguish. The steady edge ﬂame
spread rate is determined by the slope of the nearly
linear part of the curves in Fig. 4, and also from a
similar plot for 29% oxygen concentration (not
shown). The results are plotted with respect to the
imposed ﬂow velocity in Fig. 5. This ﬁgure shows
the same trends as observed in the experiments in
Fig. 2; downstream edge ﬂame spread rate increases
rapidly with an increase in the imposed ﬂow velocity,
but the upstream edge ﬂame spread rate is nearly
independent or decreases slightly with the imposed
ﬂow velocity in the range used in this study.
Discussion
The spread rate of the upstream edge ﬂame was
greater than the upstream center ﬂame due to improved oxygen supply along edges and also heat
transfer from ﬂame to the virgin sample surface. This

EDGE FLAME SPREAD IN MICROGRAVITY

2847

Fig. 7. The calculated distribution of heat feedback rate
to the sample in 33% oxygen. The upper half is the imposed
ﬂow velocity of 3 cm/s and the lower half is 1 cm/s. The
ﬂow is from right to left. Ignition is initiated at x ‫ 0 ס‬cm.
Fig. 5. The calculated spread rate with respect to imposed ﬂow velocity in 29% (X on the symbol) and 33%
oxygen concentrations. Open symbol is along an open edge,
and solid symbol is over the center part of the sample.

Fig. 6. On the bottom half are color contours of net
oxygen mass ﬂux normal to the 5 ‫( 5מ01 ן‬g/cm3s) reaction
rate isosurface. On the top half is the same reaction rate
isosurface colored by temperature (K). Char fraction contours of the sample are plotted in both halves. Conditions
are in 33% oxygen concentration with 2 cm/s imposed ﬂow
at 11 s from irradiation. Flow is from right to left. Grid
lines are 1 cm spaced.

was particularly so at low imposed ﬂow velocities because the diffusion process dominated over convection and the diffusion process was most enhanced at
the open edges. The oxygen mass ﬂux vectors clearly
show this in Fig. 3. Also, the lower half of Fig. 6
shows that the amount of oxygen mass ﬂux to the
upstream edge ﬂames is roughly two times higher
than that to the central ﬂame. Furthermore, heat
transfer from ﬂame to the sample surface is more
efﬁcient for edge ﬂames than center ﬂame due to
geometrical edge ﬂame shape with respect to the
sample edge (roughly factor of 3 at 1 cm/s imposed
ﬂow) as shown in Fig. 7. (This enhancement in ﬂux
includes two effects; one is higher edge ﬂame temperature due to larger oxygen supply to the ﬂame
and also increased heat transfer rate.) Note that the
upstream edge ﬂame spread rate is nearly independent of, or decreases slightly with, imposed ﬂow velocity, compared with rapid increase for center
ﬂame. The calculated gas-phase temperature of the
upstream edge ﬂame, as shown in Fig. 6, does not
increase with the ﬂow velocity. This indicates that
there is a sufﬁcient oxygen supply to the edge ﬂame,
and further increase in the velocity will gradually
cool the ﬂame. Consequently, the heat ﬂux from
edge ﬂame to the sample surface is nearly the same
for two different imposed velocities as seen in Fig.
7. However, higher imposed ﬂow velocity increases
center ﬂame temperature due to increased oxygen
supply, and the heat ﬂux from the center ﬂame to
the sample surface increases signiﬁcantly as seen in
Fig. 7. Oxygen supply to the downstream edge
ﬂames greatly exceeds that to the center part of the
downstream ﬂame spread, as shown in Figs. 3 and
6. Because the supply continues to increase with the
imposed ﬂow velocity, the downstream edge ﬂame
spread rate increases signiﬁcantly with the imposed
ﬂow velocity.

2848

FIRE—Ignition and Flame Spread

oxygen case); otherwise, it extinguishes (29% oxygen
case).

Conclusion

Fig. 8. The calculated gas-phase reaction rate distribution and gas-phase temperature distribution in a vertical
plane along the open edge of the sample (the sample plane
is at z ‫ 0 ס‬cm). Conditions are 33% oxygen, time is 11 s,
and 2 cm/s imposed ﬂow velocity. Upper half of ﬁgure has
color contours of gas-phase reaction rate and net oxygen
mass ﬂux vectors (convection ‫ ם‬diffusion), and lower half
has temperature color contours and convective oxygen
mass ﬂux vectors. Flow is from right to left. Ignition is
initiated at x ‫ 0 ס‬cm.

The next question is why the ﬂame separated into
upstream ﬂame and downstream ﬂame/ﬂames as observed in the experiment and also in the calculation.
When an upstream ﬂame is present, the downstream
ﬂame can fail to spread because the upstream ﬂame
consumes too much oxygen, although heat feedback
rate to the sample surface is sufﬁcient [5,10,12]. This
can be seen in Figs. 3, 6, and 7. When the imposed
ﬂow velocity is reduced, oxygen supply to the downstream ﬂame becomes less, but still a sufﬁcient
amount of oxygen can be supplied to the downstream edge ﬂames from the outer free stream
mainly by diffusion. This is seen in Figs. 6 and 8. In
Fig. 8, the difference between the total oxygen mass
ﬂux vector (upper plot) and convective oxygen mass
ﬂux vector (lower plot) is the oxygen supply ﬂux vector to the ﬂames by diffusion. The convective oxygen
mass ﬂux to the downstream edge ﬂame is very
small, as shown in the ﬁgure. Although the oxygen
supply by diffusion to the ﬂame continues along the
downstream open edges, the fuel supply from the
thermally thin sample (Fig. 3b) eventually becomes
depleted. This causes the middle part of the edge
ﬂame to extinguish. The ﬂame then separates into
an upwind spreading ﬂame across the entire sample
and two downwind edge ﬂames. If sufﬁcient oxygen
is present, the downwind edge ﬂame survives (33%

The edge ﬂame gets a greater oxygen supply from
the outer free stream by convection and diffusion
and has a more efﬁcient heat transfer rate to the
sample, due to the unique geometrical ﬂame shape.
Thus, ﬂame spread along the open edges of a thermally thin cellulosic sample is faster than over its
center part with an imposed ﬂow velocity up to about
5 cm/s in microgravity. However, the upstream edge
ﬂame spread rate is nearly independent of or decreases gradually with the imposed ﬂow velocity.
When the imposed ﬂow velocity is as low as 2 cm/s
or less in air, downstream edge ﬂame spread does
not occur in the presence of the upstream ﬂame, due
to a lack of oxygen supply to the ﬂame. However,
downstream edge ﬂame spread increases signiﬁcantly with an increase in the imposed ﬂow velocity.
The transition from localized ignition to subsequent
ﬂame spread tends to occur along open edges at an
imposed ﬂow velocity which is lower than that required in the center area. Also, the edge ﬂame tends
to spread faster than the central ﬂame. Therefore,
ﬂame spread along an open edge presented a greater
ﬁre hazard in microgravity in the range of the imposed ﬂow velocity used in this study, and threedimensional modeling is critically needed to describe realistic ﬁre phenomena.
Acknowledgments
This work is funded by the NASA Microgravity Science
Program under the Inter-Agency Agreement No. C-32001R under technical monitoring of Dr. Sandra Olson.

REFERENCES
1. Olson, S. L., Combust. Sci. Technol. 76:233–249
(1991).
2. Grayson, G. D., Sacksteder, K., Ferkul, P. V. and T’ien,
J. S., Micrograv. Sci. Technol. 99:345–370 (1994).
3. Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R. A., and Sacksteder,
K., J. Heat Transfer 118:181–190 (1996).
4. Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R. A., and Sacksteder,
K., Combust. Sci. Technol. 91:225–242 (1993).
5. Kashiwagi, T., McGrattan, K. B., Olson, S. L., Fujita,
O., Kikuchi, M., and Ito, K., Proc. Combust. Inst.
26:1345–1352 (1996).
6. West, J., Tang, L., Altenkirch, R. A., Bhattacharjee, S.,
Sacksteder, K., and Delichatsios, M. A., Proc. Combust. Inst. 26:1335–1343 (1996).

EDGE FLAME SPREAD IN MICROGRAVITY
7. Altenkirch, R. A., Tang, L., Sacksteder, K., Bhattacharjee, S., and Delichatsios, M. A., Proc. Combust.
Inst. 27:2515–2524 (1998).
8. Emmons, H. W., and Shen, T., Proc. Combust. Inst.
13:917–926 (1971).
9. Markstein, G. H., and de Ris, J., J. Fire Flamm. 6:140–
154 (1975).

2849

10. McGrattan, K. B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum, H. R., and
Olson, S. L., Combust. Flame 106:377–391 (1996).
11. Nakabe, K., McGrattan, K. B., Kashiwagi, T., Baum,
H. R., Yamashita, H., and Kushida, G., Combust.
Flame 98:361–374 (1994).
12. Mell, W. E., and Kashiwagi, T., Proc. Combust. Inst.
27:2635–2641 (1998).

COMMENTS
Carlos Fernadez-Pello, University of California Berkeley, USA. That the ﬂame spread faster on the edges is also
observed with thick fuels in normal quantity. Do you think
in that case oxygen supply is the reason for the faster spread
rate or is it also enhancement of heat transfer to the solid?
Author’s Reply. In normal gravity, buoyancy-induced
ﬂow velocity is much higher than the velocity range used
in this study, the supply of oxygen to ﬂame front is sufﬁcient, and heat transfer from ﬂame to the sample surface
ahead of the ﬂame is the rate-controlling step. Therefore,
enhancement of heat transfer is the reason for faster ﬂame
spread rate over free edges or open corners.
●
John L. de Ris, Factory Mutual Research, USA. A very
interesting paper. It appears from your photographs that
the ﬂame stand-off distance from the edge is considerably
greater in the experiment than predicted from the model.
If this is the case, could you please comment on the reason?
Author’s Reply. The ﬂame picture you are referring to,
which I showed in the early part of the presentation, was
not for the case of ﬂame spread along open edges but was

for ﬂame spread along the center of the sample. This picture was used to show that ﬂame spread occurs only in the
upstream direction when the sample is ignited locally (spot
ignition) in the center of the sample. The model predictions you refer to were in vertical planes along the open
edge of the sample. However, it is nearly impossible to
experimentally observe the ﬂame stand-off distance for
spread along open edges because the ﬂame entirely surrounds the open edge. We therefore used side-view ﬂame
pictures taken in the two-dimensional conﬁguration (nearly
line-shape ﬂame across the sample) to estimate the ﬂame
stand-off. The experiment was conducted in a 10 s drop
tower in 35% oxygen concentration under 2 cm/s wind using a 10 cm wide sample. The experimentally determined
cross section of the ﬂame is compared with that calculated
by our two-dimensional code with the same wind and oxygen conditions. The simulated ﬂame shape is determined
by the gas-phase reaction rate distribution; note that the
shape will depend on the selection of the gas-phase reaction rate. The simulation ﬂame stand-off distance at the
ﬂame tip (about 3.5 mm at highest reaction rate) is very
close to the measured values based the tip of the yellowish
ﬂame (about 3.7 mm). However, the blue color part of the
ﬂame is ahead of the yellowish ﬂame front and is very close
to the sample surface (it is difﬁcult to determine but appears to be roughly 1 mm) and the calculated gas-phase
reaction rate extends close to the sample surface.

