Technology Development for Fire Safety in Exploration
Spacecraft and Habitats
Gary A. Ruff1 and David L. Urban2
NASA John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44256

Fire during an exploration mission far from Earth is a particularly critical risk for
exploration vehicles and habitats. The Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression (FPDS)
project is part of the Exploration Technology Development Program (ETDP) and has the
goal to enhance crew health and safety on exploration missions by reducing the likelihood of
a fire, or, if one does occur, minimizing the risk to the mission, crew, or system. Within the
past year, the FPDS project has been formalized within the ETDP structure and has seen
significant progress on its tasks in fire prevention, detection, and suppression. As
requirements for Constellation vehicles and, specifically, the CEV have developed, the need
for the FPDS technologies has become more apparent and we continue to make strides to
infuse them into the Constellation architecture. This paper describes the current structure of
the project within the ETDP and summarizes the significant programmatic activities. Major
technical accomplishments are identified as are activities planned for FY07.

I. Introduction and Background

T

he Vision for Space Exploration (VSE) announced by President George W. Bush on January 14, 2004 directed
NASA to achieve the long-term goal of sending humans back to the Moon and then on to Mars. The extent of
knowledge that must be gained and the number of technologies that must be developed before such missions can
occur are certainly formidable. The performance standards required for these technologies are, in many cases, well
beyond those used on the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle and will stretch our current knowledge
of living and working in space. A large number of the challenges are related to ensuring the health and safety of the
crew during the exploration mission.
The Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression (FPDS) project is a technology development effort within the
Exploration Technology Development Program (ETDP) of the Exploration System Missions Directorate (ESMD)
that addresses all aspects of fire safety aboard crewed exploration systems. The overarching goal for the FPDS
project is to develop technologies that will ensure crew health and safety on exploration missions by reducing the
likelihood of a fire, or, if one does occur, minimizing the risk to the crew, mission, or system. This is accomplished
by addressing the areas of (1) fire prevention and material flammability, (2) fire signatures and detection, and (3)
fire suppression and response. Much of this work had its origins in the Microgravity Combustion Science Program
that began in the mid-1980’s and funded peer-reviewed basic research in a broad range of topics in reduced-gravity
combustion.1 In early 2000, the Bioastronautics Initiative provided funds to allow researchers in the Microgravity
Combustion Science Program to begin to transition from basic research to more applied fire safety investigations
although still through the peer-reviewed, NASA Research Announcement (NRA) process. The announcement of the
VSE continued the transition to technology development projects with the FPDS project being formed shortly
thereafter. The grants funded by the 2001 and 2002 combustion science NRA solicitations have either been
continued in the FPDS project or allowed to end in FY06 at the completion of their funding. (In many cases, the
projects were terminated after three years of funding, as directed by NASA HQ, instead of the normal four years.)
This paper identifies the deliverables for the FPDS project and discusses the status of the project. Even though
the goals of the FPDS project have remained unchanged since its inception, it has undergone considerable review
and revision as NASA implements the VSE, as has all the technology development projects. The status of the
project was reviewed in January of 20052 and 20063 so this paper will focus on the programmatic activities and
technical accomplishments over the last year for the current tasks within the FPDS project.
1

FPDS Project Lead, NASA John H. Glenn Research Center/MS 77-7, AIAA Associate Fellow..
Chief, Combustion and Reacting Systems Branch, NASA John H. Glenn Research Center/MS 77-5, AIAA Senior
Member.

2

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

II. Project Description and Deliverables
As previously stated, the goal for this work is to develop technologies that will ensure crew health and safety on
exploration missions by reducing the likelihood of a fire, or, if one does occur, minimizing the risk to the crew,
mission, or system. This may be accomplished by developing technologies that are applied during the design of the
vehicle to eliminate or reduce the probability of a fire or by developing technologies to provide the crew with
effective detection and suppression systems to minimize the impact on the spacecraft systems and mission success if
a fire would occur. The technologies under development in the FPDS project are identified by a set of deliverables
(or products) consisting of hardware, design requirements, data for trade studies, test procedures, data libraries, or
recommendations for fire response procedures, depending on the application. For FPDS, the deliverables are:
Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
1. Definition and verification of a normal gravity material flammability test(s) to evaluate
reduced gravity flammability
2. Assessments of material flammability in relevant cabin atmospheres and gravity levels for
exploration transit vehicles and habitats
3. Definition and evaluation of realistic fire and fire response scenarios for exploration
spacecraft and habitats
Fire Signatures and Detection
4. Advanced detection system for gaseous and particulate pre-fire and fire signatures
5. Verified models of the transport of contaminants, smoke, and combustion gases throughout
the habitable volume of a spacecraft or habitat
Fire Suppression and Response
6. Design rules for suppressant system including effectiveness of suppressants, required
concentrations, and dispersion methods
These were originally developed through a series of workshops that focused on spacecraft fire safety4-6 as well as
previous studies and reports that have addressed fire protection in spacecraft.7-9 The most recent workshops were
held in 2001,4 2003,5 and 2004; the first workshop was held in 1986.6 Given the changes that have occurred in
NASA’s exploration mission during this period, one might expect the FPDS deliverables to have changed
significantly. Independent of the mission, NASA’s basic philosophy to ensure fire safety on spacecraft has remained
constant during this period and the FPDS deliverables are aligned with that philosophy. What has changed, however,
is (1) the technology available to apply that philosophy, (2) the specific missions to which this technology is applied,
and (3) our understanding of low-gravity phenomena related to fire safety. So, even though the deliverables are the
same, the tasks to achieve these deliverables are constantly reviewed and revised as the technology needs change. In
the remainder of the paper, the tasks are identified and briefly discussed with specific emphasis on noteworthy or
timely accomplishments.

III. Programmatic Considerations
A. Exploration Technology Development Program
At the beginning of 2006, the Exploration Technology Development Program (ETDP) was still in the
formulation process. As the program was defined, so were the requirements on the technology development projects.
All projects conformed to new reporting and operational procedures aimed at providing uniformity in how
technology was evaluated, developed and infused into the Constellation Program. This completed the transition from
research-type projects to technology development that was begun with the announcement of the Vision for Space
Exploration. One requirement was that every project formulate a project plan to outline the general direction and
procedures for each project given the anticipated funding levels at the Spring 2006. The FPDS project plan,
completed and signed in May 2006, developed the philosophy and major objectives of the tasks described in this
paper. The second major programmatic accomplishment of the year was the successful completion of the Integrated
Baseline Review (IBR). The purpose of the IBR, conducted by the ETDPO, was to review the detailed
implementation plan for FY07 although major milestones for later years were also addressed. To prepare for this
review, specific plans for each FPDS task were formulated including objectives, recent accomplishments, FY07
milestones, budget, and implementation plan for the assessment of Earned Value. The FPDS review was completed
in October 2006 and this paper summarizes much of the content presented in the IBR. Interestingly, planning for the

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

IBR by the entire FPDS team provided a framework for all team members to plan their work for the year and
become more familiar with the overall objectives of the FPDS project.
B. Constellation and CEV Program Requirements Formulation
The continued maturation and activities of the Constellation and CEV Program Offices has had the largest
programmatic impact on the FPDS during the year. The Constellation Program Office (CxPO) initiated Level II
activities by forming various Systems Integration Groups (SIGs) that are the “owners” of the Constellation
Requirements for that discipline. The fire detection and suppression function on a spacecraft is part of the
Environmental Control and Life Support (ECLS) system and, as such, is included in the ECLS-Thermal SIG, led by
Robyn Carrasquillo of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and John Lewis of NASA Johnson Space Center. The
SIG activity that has most impacted the FPDS project has been the formulation of the fire detection and suppression
(FDS) requirements in the Constellation Architecture Requirements Document (CARD) and the Human Systems
Integration Requirements (HSIR). While the Level II requirements are at a fairly high level, the requirements
formulation process prompted many discussions about the philosophy of fire detection and suppression to be used
on Constellation vehicles and, therefore, helped confirm and guide FPDS tasks.
The CEV (now called Orion) Project Office was also set up during this year. The development of the vehicle
Level III requirements further helped to refine the fire detection and suppression requirements for CEV. The
selection of a prime contractor for Orion made discussions of the fire detection and suppression systems more
concrete as the differences between the NASA and contractor designs were debated and resolved. While the design
is still in flux, the FPDS tasks have remained important and relevant to the development of the Orion spacecraft.
C. Implementation
The FPDS project is led by the NASA Glenn Research Center and several teams have been formed to implement
tasks in areas of material flammability, fire detection, and fire suppression. The Flammability Research Team, led
by Dr. Fletcher Miller, monitors and implements the tasks in the area of fire prevention and material flammability.
Similarly, Dr. Daniel Dietrich leads the Fire Suppression and Response Research Team. Because of synergy with the
Environmental Monitoring and Control project and the recently formulated “Dust” project, the Fire Signature and
Detection Research Team is co-led by Dr. David G. Fischer and the authors. These teams defined the tasks to be
discussed in the next section, developed work schedules and defined appropriate milestones that will be used to
implement Earned Value Management for this project.

IV. Description and Status
Considerable progress has been made toward the stated FPDS deliverables in the past year. Even with the
programmatic uncertainties, the FPDS scientists and technicians are entering 2007 with a clear direction on the
objectives and requirements for each task. In this section, each of the major tasks in FPDS are briefly described
along with the current status and plans for the coming year. Particular emphasis will to given to those tasks with
noteworthy or timely accomplishments. The deliverables addressed by each task are also noted in parentheses
because there if not always a one-to-one correspondence and several tasks can contribute to a single deliverable.
A. Fire Prevention and Material Flammability
1. Normal Gravity Flammability Test (Deliverable 1)
One of the deliverables of the FPDS project is a methodology by which the low-gravity flammability of a
material can be determined based on a test conducted in normal gravity. Currently, two general approaches to
achieve this deliverable are being investigated. The first approach is to define a normal-gravity test configuration
such that the effect of buoyancy on the flame behavior is minimized. In the second approach, specific flammability
properties of the material are measured in the presence of buoyancy and the low-gravity behavior is determined from
the measured values of these properties. Three tasks within the FPDS project follow one of these two approaches
and are discussed later in this paper (Section IV.A., sub-sections 2, 3, and 4).
Even while the test methods are being developed, we must remain focused on the infusion of this technology as a
NASA standard test. Through our work with the NASA-STD-6001 Topical Working Group, it has become clear that
even if a test exists that yields a quantitative measure of low-gravity flammability, it might not be acceptable as a
standardized test. Other factors must be considered and, depending on the test, may become obstacles to that test
ever being adopted. We developed a working list of these requirements, shown in Table 1, to help guide our Team in
the formulation of topics that must be addressed for each of the proposed methods.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Table 1. Criteria for Acceptance of a Material Flammability Test Method
A. Cost Effectiveness
i. sample preparation time
ii. time required to conduct test
iii. time required for data acquisition and analysis
iv. applicability of results to other material thicknesses, atmospheric conditions, etc.
B. Theoretical Justification
i. measurement of a relevant fire safety parameter
ii. verified relationship between test results and low-g behavior
iii. results scalable to other graivty levels (Lunar or Martian)
iv. results are applicable to other material thicknesses, atmospheric conditions, etc.
C. Test Performance
i. test procedure is applicable for a variety of material types (foams, films, fabrics, etc.)
ii. demonstrated repeatability and precision
iii. well-defined facility requirements and protocol

There are no specific weighting factors or rankings by which these requirements can be used to compare two or
more test methods. Instead, these are more useful as “go/no-go” requirements that could identify a potential obstacle
for a specific method. For example, NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 is NASA’s primary material flammability screening
test10 and it is useful to subject this test to these criteria. Test 1 is frequently criticized from microgravity combustion
science and fire safety community because its lack of a theoretical justification and connection to low-gravity
flammability. In defense of the test, upward flame spread is generally a “worst-case” flame spread condition and the
igniter used in the test is considered to be more energetic that spacecraft ignition sources. Therefore, even though
the low-gravity justification for this test may be lacking, the test is assumed to be conservative. Also, over the years,
the cost effectiveness and the test performance has been demonstrated to be quite acceptable. Therefore, while
scientists in the FPDS project frequently focus on tests that have a strong theoretical justification, we must
remember that the test should not impose a significant burden in either cost or time from any combination of test
time, sample preparation, specialized facilities, data analysis, etc. Therefore, in addition to continuing the technical
justification of these methods, work is being conducted on all of the proposed test methods to evaluate the broad
range of requirements listed in Table 1 during FY07. This will lead to a formal evaluation and down-select at the
end of the fiscal year with only the most promising method or methods continuing development into FY08 and
beyond.
2. Forced Ignition and Spread Test (FIST) - (Deliverable 1)
One of the test methods being considered as a standardized test is the Forced Ignition and Spread Test (FIST)
(PI: Prof. C. Fernandez-Pello, University of California – Berkeley). The general approach applied in this method is
to measure standard material flammability characteristics and then perform engineering calculations, including
computer fire modeling, to calculate the impact of various fire scenarios on the spacecraft under consideration. The
FIST apparatus, shown in Fig. 1 and described by Cordova et al.11, is a small-scale wind tunnel with the sample
material mounted flush to the bottom wall of the tunnel and irradiated by heaters in the upper wall of the duct. The
radiant heaters are designed to provide a spatially-varying radiant flux that is highest at the downstream end of the
sample and decreases along its length. The data obtained from the FIST apparatus can be plotted as a ‘flammability
diagram’ that shows the ignition time and flame spread rate as a function of the external heat flux. The critical heat
flux for ignition given can also be determined from the test data. The primary significance of the test method is that
material flammability properties such as the apparent thermal inertia, effective ignition temperature, and flame
spread parameters can be determined by correlating the flame spread and ignition delay branches of the diagram
with a theoretical model (analytical or numerical). Using this information, materials can be ranked based on their
readiness for piloted ignition, susceptibility to flame spread, and extinction characteristics.
FIST researchers have been investigating both experimentally and computationally the critical mass-loss rate
required for a sample to ignite. This could prove to be a flammability acceptance criterion for this test. Planned tasks
for FY07 include developing the capability to conduct tests in exploration atmospheres (up to 36% O2 and
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

approximately 7 psia), and verifying the test protocol. In the computational analysis, they will complete the solid
phase model and use it to investigate the effect of oxygen concentration and gravity on the results.

Figure 1. Forced Ignition and Spread Test (FIST) experimental apparatus and typical flame. A
schematic of the FIST apparatus is shown in the left-hand image while a side-view of a typical flame is
shown on the right. The blue flame is visible at the upstream portion of the sample with a smoke trail
extending over the igniter on the right.

3. Low Stretch Scaling (Deliverable 1)
Unlike the FIST apparatus discussed above, the Equivalent Low-Stretch Apparatus (ELSA) uses an experimental
configuration in which buoyancy is suppressed (PI: Dr. S. L. Olson, NASA GRC). The configuration and test
techniques of the ELSA test are similar to a cone calorimeter test except that the sample is burned above the radiant
heater as shown in Fig. 2.12 In this configuration, the velocity gradient normal to the flame sheet is largely
determined by the velocity of the incoming flow rather than buoyancy. The hypothesis is that this “low-stretch”
flame shares many features with a low-gravity flame frequently
characterized by low stretch rates because of the lack of buoyancy.
However, the concept of low-stretch scaling places fairly strict
requirements on the flow field in the apparatus which can be perturbed
by the interaction of the incoming flow, radiant heater, and burning
sample. In FY06, smoke flow visualization was used to observe the
flow in the apparatus and, as a result, a new nozzle was fabricated and
installed. A modeling effort using both the Fire Dynamic Simulator and
FLUENT computational codes was begun to investigate the details of
the ELSA flow field and the low-stretch scaling assumptions. A
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) system is being set up to obtain
quantitative measurements of the flow field that will be compared to
the numerical results. Recently, tests have been performed on various
materials such as Combitherm™, Kevlar™, Nomex™, Pyrell™
foam, and Kydex™ to evaluate the suitability of this test for a range of
materials. No significant difficulties in testing these materials have
Figure 2. Sketch of the Equivalent
been identified. Both the modeling and experimental verification tests
Low-Stretch Apparatus (ELSA).
will continue in FY07.
4. Sub-critical Rayleigh Number Analogy (Deliverable 1)
While the ELSA configuration suppresses buoyancy by burning the sample in a ceiling configuration, another
way to suppress buoyant convection is to burn the sample between two plates separated by a small distance. The
plate separation is determined from the Rayleigh number defined as the ratio of the buoyant to viscous forces in a
fluid and given by the equation

Ra =

gβ (T1 − T2 )L3

αν

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

(1)

where g is the gravitational acceleration, β is the coefficient of thermal expansion, L is the characteristic length, α is
the thermal diffusivity, and ν is kinematic viscosity. T1 and T2 are the temperatures of the lower (heated) and upper
plates, respectively. For Rayleigh numbers less than a critical value, buoyancy forces cannot overcome the
resistance imposed by the viscous forces and there is no buoyancy-driven convection within the cavity thereby
simulating a low-g environment. For horizontal plates heated from below, the value of the critical Rayleigh number
is approximately 1708.13 Using T1=900 deg C and T2=80 deg C, the plate separation distance, L, that yields
Rac=1708 is 1.1 cm. Accordingly, the plate separation typically used in the Narrow Channel Facility is 1.0 cm
configuration.
The Narrow Channel Facility can measure the flame spread rate and the propensity for flame propagation at a
specific flow velocity, pressure, and oxygen concentration14 (PI: Dr. F. J. Miller, National Center for Space
Exploration Research (NCSER)). The primary question being examined at this time is whether the distance between
the plates can be standardized for most samples or whether it must be determined for each type of material to be
tested. Also, FPDS scientists have recently investigated whether the flame spread rate can be determined as a
function of flow velocity in a single test by slowly decreasing the flow velocity (approx. 2 cm/s2) rather than by
conducting multiple, constant velocity tests. Although still under investigation, the results to date have been
promising. Given the results of these tests, the facility is being modified so that the oxygen concentration can be
slowly decreased during a test to determine the minimum oxygen concentration for flame spread. Other aspects of
this test that will be evaluated in FY07 include the effectiveness of the test to evaluate concurrent (upward) flame
spread, the burning of thick materials, and the impact of heat loss to the walls on the test results.
5. Evaluation of NASA-STD-6001 Test 1(Deliverables 1 and 2)
Recently, Quintiere15 has made use of flammability parameters defined by Tewarson16 to develop a theoretical
formulation for fire growth processes such as ignition, burning and energy release rate, and flame spread under
external radiant heating. More significantly, however, this formalism also identifies critical conditions that can limit
these processes. The methodology has been demonstrated using data obtained from the Room Corner Test (ISO 54)
for a variety of materials and a similar type of analysis will be performed for NASA-STD-6001 Test 1. For example,
NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 can be thought of as a sequence of several types of flammability tests. First, it is an
ignition test using a specific external heating profile produced by the igniter. If the material ignites, it then becomes
a flame propagation test first with the igniter on but after 25 sec (the approximate time the igniter is on) with the
only energy input provided by the flame itself. Of course, a material fails Test 1 if the flame propagates more that 15
cm (6 inches). If this formalism can developed to define critical values of the flammability parameters that dictate
whether these processes can occur for this test, a firm connection can be made between NASA’s existing test and
other standard material flammability tests, including those under development to determine low-gravity
flammability. Maintaining a connection to the existing material flammability database (MAPTIS17) while supplying
additional information about low-gravity flammability would significantly increase NASA’s ability to assess
flammability risks during future exploration missions.
6. Pressure-Gravity Scaling (Deliverable 1 and 2)
The previous tasks were aimed at developing test methods that could be used to assess low-g material
flammability. While these methods could potentially be applied to partial-gravity applications, our understanding of
material flammability in partial gravity is even less than that in low (near zero) gravity. Test results have shown that
flammability limits, i.e., oxygen concentrations that support combustion are not simple interpolations between low-g
and normal-g.18 Therefore, two FPDS tasks are aimed at developing test techniques that could be used evaluate
partial-g flammability or provide data to verify the performance of the low-g test methodologies previously
described for partial-gravity applications. Feier et al.19 and Kleinhenz20 have investigated methods to scale results
from upward flame spread experiments conducted at reduced pressures to upward flame spread rates in partial
gravity. This technique, called Grashof number (or P2-g) scaling, has been demonstrated with good success by
comparing test results in normal gravity with those obtained at Lunar and Martian gravity levels on the C-9 aircraft.
Figure 3a shows images of upward flame spread on a 1-cm-wide paper sample at Lunar, Martian, and Earth gravity.
When the pressure is increased to compensate for the reduced gravity, the three flames appear very similar, as
shown in Fig. 3b. Figure 4 shows the flame spread rates measured under these conditions unscaled as a function of
pressure (Fig. 4a) and as a function of the scaled variable gP1.8 (Fig. 4b). The correlation is seen to be excellent and
demonstrates that the partial gravity flame spread rate can be scaled in this manner. Additional tests will be
conducted in FY07 to verify this behavior for larger samples, i.e., having the same dimensions as those used in
NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 (5 cm wide x 30 cm long of varying thickness) (co-I: Dr. Z.-G. Yuan, NCSER and Dr. J. E.
Kleinhenz, Case Western Reserve University (CWRU)).
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

a. Upward flame spread at constant
pressure at Lunar, Martian, and Earth
normal gravity. Note the difference in
burn length and flame appearance.

b. Upward flame spread at constant
P1.8g. The burn length and flame
appearance are quite similar when
the scaling is applied..

Figure 3. Comparison of burn length and flame appearance with and without P2-g scaling.

a. Upward flame spread rate at constant
pressure at Lunar, Martian, and Earth
normal gravity.

b. Upward flame spread rate correlation using
constant P1.8g.

Figure 4. Correlation of upward flame spread rate using P2-g scaling

7. Partial-Gravity Centrifuge (Deliverable 1 and 2)
To date, all tests of partial gravity material flammability have been conducted on NASA’s Reduced Gravity
Aircraft flying the appropriate trajectory. Since clean low-gravity conditions are produced in drop towers at NASA
Glenn Research Center, partial gravity could be achieved by placing a test sample on a centrifuge inside a drop rig
and applying the appropriate rotational velocity. In FY06, the mechanical design for a centrifuge drop tower rig was
completed and the components were assembled on a drop bus to be used in the Zero Gravity Facility at NASA GRC
(co-I: Dr. P. V. Ferkul, NCSER, Dr. K. R. Sacksteder, NASA GRC, and Prof. J. S. T’ien, CWRU). Later in FY07, the
rig will be wired and the check-out drops will be conducted. There are many questions to be answered about
flammability tests conducted in a centrifuge and this task will provide some needed proof-of-concept data to
determine if this is a practical tool for NASA to use to assess material flammability on the Lunar and Martian
surface as its exploration missions continue.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Cabin Total Pressure, psia

Cabin Total Pressure, kPa

8. Low-g Flammability in Exploration Atmospheres (Deliverable 2 and 3)
The atmosphere of previous spacecraft has ranged from 100% O2, 34.5 kPa for Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo
missions to standard air (21% O2/79% N2, 1 atm) for ISS and STS. (Atmospheric conditions prior to EVA are
different from the standard cabin atmosphere.) These design points are shown in Fig. 5 and generally lie along the
normoxic equivalent line, i.e., having the same O2 partial pressure as 100 kPa, 21% O2 by volume.21 In order to
maintain O2 partial pressure
Shuttle/Mir/ISS
along the normoxic line, the
100
14
Normoxic Equivalent
%O2 increases as the total
90
pressure decreases. Yet, it is
Hypoxic Boundary
12
the mole fraction of oxygen
Historical Designs
80
that affects the flammability
70 Shuttle EVA Preparation
10
of materials. The increased
52.7 – 58.6 kPa, 27.6 - 34% O2
flammability of materials in
60
8
these conditions is critical in
50
Early Apollo Design
terms of fire initiation,
6
propagation, and suppression.
40
Skylab
Mercury/Gemini/Apollo
In June 2006, the ECLSDecompression
sickness
30
Thermal SIG recommended
4
to the Constellation Systems
20
Flammability
Engineering Control Board
2
Hypoxia
10
(ECB) a set of atmospheres
for the habitable volume of
0
0
the
CEV
and
future
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
exploration vehicles along
Cabin Volume Percent Oxygen
with
an
operational
Figure 5. Design space for cabin atmosphere pressure and O2
philosophy of how the
concentration. Arrows indicate the trends for increasing risk of
atmosphere could be varied
decompression sickness as a result of EVA, hypoxia, and flammability.21
depending
on
mission
destination and objectives.
The Board recommended that additional material flammability testing be performed to verify assumptions about the
difficulty of certifying material flammability at increased oxygen concentrations. Specifically, NASA White Sands
Test Facility would conduct NASA-STD-6001 Test 1 at an ambient pressure of 10.2 psia and a range of oxygen
concentrations to identify the maximum oxygen concentration (MOC) for which the material passes Test 1. For
these initial tests, approximately 50 materials would be evaluated. Also included in this test program was a series of
tests to be conducted in the Zero-Gravity Facility at NASA GRC to determine whether the MOC obtained in lowgravity was different than that obtained in the normal gravity test. Previous research has shown that a flame can be
sustained at lower oxygen concentrations in low-gravity when buoyancy is eliminated and the convective velocity is
less than that imposed by buoyant convection.22 A significant difference (> 1 – 2 %O2) between the low- and normal
gravity limits could change the habitable atmosphere recommendations. In fact, even prior to the request by the
Constellation ECB, these tests were a part of the FPDS technology development project because this low-g data is
required for verification of the normal gravity flammability tests methods previously discussed (co-I: Dr. S. L.
Olson, NASA GRC and F. J. Miller, NCSER).
The ZGF drop rig to conduct these tests has been completed and the initial drops were conducted in December
2006. The oxygen threshold tests will begin early in FY07 after a short period of rig check-out and development of
the test procedure. This round of tests will be completed no later than September 2007.
B. Fire Signatures and Detection
1. Gas and Particulate Sensor Development (Deliverable 4)
Smoke detectors on the ISS have proven to be sensitive to dust and have produced numerous false alarms. For
this reason and other design constraints that will be imposed on future spacecraft, there is a need for new fire
detector technology that eliminates nuisance alarms yet provides early pre-fire warning. The state-of-the-art in fire
detection combines gaseous and particulate sensors into a hybrid fire detection system. Since 2001, the FPDS
project has funded (along with other sources) the development of a sensor suite that couples solid state sensors for
CO, CO2, H2, total hydrocarbons, and humidity with a particulate sensor (co-I: Dr. G. W. Hunter and Dr. P. S.
Greenberg, NASA GRC). This hybrid detector has proven to have very good nuisance source discrimination while

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

correctly identifying fires from a variety of fire sources. A newly-developed scattering sensor for particulate
monitoring is being developed and will replace the particulate sensor in this suite.
As a result of several Technical Interchange Meetings (TIMs) between NASA and NASA/CEV contractor
personnel, a set of requirements, shown in Table 2, were drafted to guide the development of these sensors in FY07
and beyond. These requirements are not reflected in an official CxP or Orion requirements document (yet) but they
help to define desired detector operating characteristics, design parameters, and required testing so that sensor
development can proceed. Both the gaseous and particulate detectors are on a path to produce an advanced fire
detector by the end of FY07. A portion of the verification testing will be completed by that time with a more
detailed assessment to be completed in FY08.
Table 2. Working Requirements for Spacecraft Fire Detector
1.

Time correlated detection of the presence of particulate and gaseous pre-fire and fire species. At a minimum, CO
should be detected; other species if required to demonstrate reliability, reduce nuisance alarms, etc.

2.

Respond to particles in the range of 0.5 - 4 microns and ignore particles having larger diameters

4.

Sample particles at ambient flow velocities ranging from 5 - 15 cm/s with the flow direction within 35 deg of normal
to the plane of the sampling or sample tube area
Detector should be able to operate continuously for no less than 6 months

5.

Tolerant of expected cabin dust levels on the moon and ISS

6.

Tolerant of vacuum cycles (unpowered)

3.

7.

Operates at ambient pressures from 1 atm to 8 psia

8.

10.

Capable of passing typical spacecraft noise, power, EMI, and thermal testing
Tolerant of nuisance sources including but not limited to lunar dust, spacecraft dust (hair, skin cells, fabric threads,
etc.), humidity, and cleaning fluids
Sampling rate of 1 Hz

11.

Able to achieve 80% of full-scale in 1 sec when challenged with an appropriate full-scale source.

12.

Alarm levels (~ 106 particles/cc or 2 mg/m3) , Species levels TBD

9.

2. Quantification of Fire Signatures (Deliverable 4)
Even the best sensors won’t detect a fire unless they are in a proper location and have been set to the appropriate
alarm levels. Working together, they can effectively provide early fire detection as well as reliably identify nuisance
sources. Therefore, while developing these sensors, there is a need to (1) quantify the gaseous and particulate fire
signatures from common spacecraft materials and (2) test the sensors under pre-fire conditions with these materials.
A ground-based facility has been developed to evaluate gaseous fire signatures from various materials using a
variety of analytical techniques (PI: Dr. R. L. VanderWal, NCSER). In this facility, shown in Fig. 6, a sample is
drawn into a furnace that has
been pre-heated to a desired
temperature. Light gases such
as H2, O2, N2, CO, CO2, CH2
that are evolved are quantified
by gas chromatography and
mass
spectrometry.
Condensibles and particulate
are
collected using an
adsorption column and filter,
respectively and undergo
analysis as desired. Initial tests
on the sensor suite discussed
in the previous section have
been conducted in this
apparatus and these tests will
continue in FY07.
Figure 6. Schematic of the facility to evaluate fire signatures and advanced
TGA-FTIR analysis has
fire detection technologies
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

been used with these samples to identify the gases evolved during smoldering and flaming combustion. The samples
that are being evaluated include cotton, Kapton™, Teflon™, silicone rubber, Kevlar™, polyimide, melamine, and
polyurethane foams, and Halar™ and Viton™ wire insulation. Tasks to be conducted in FY07 include (1)
continuing the quantification of fire signatures using the assembled diagnostics, (2) preparation of a final report on
the findings of the fire signature studies, and (3) evaluation of prototype gaseous fire detectors. Task (3) will provide
an early indication of fire detector performance and develop the protocol for the general testing and evaluation of
potential fire detectors for use on the CEV and LSAM.
While no longer a formal part of the FPDS project, the Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME),
an experiment is an essential component of the fire signatures and detection technology area. The objective of the
Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME) (PI: Dr. David L. Urban, NASA GRC) is to conduct a test in the
ISS Microgravity Science Glovebox to provide in situ particle size information for several smoke aerosols (solid and
liquid).23 This data will quantify the particulate pre-fire signatures of relevant spacecraft materials (Kapton™ and
Teflon™, for example) and be used to guide the development of improved smoke detectors. The SAME experiment
is currently scheduled for Flight Hardware Availability in February of 2007 and launch aboard STS 13A.1 later in
2007.
3. Modeling of Smoke and Contaminant Transport (Deliverable 3)
The effectiveness of even the most refined fire detector will be reduced unless it is located in the right place and
the time required for the contaminant to reach a detectable level at that location is known. The objective of this task
is to develop the tools and methodology to evaluate fire detector placement and time-to-alarm for a given spacecraft
geometry. (PI: J. E. Brooker, NASA GRC) In the absence of a sufficiently detailed design for the CEV, work has
focused on analyzing smoke transport and smoke detector activation in the Destiny module of the ISS. The module
dimensions, vent locations, and flow rates were obtained from ISS documentation and conversations with ISS
Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) personnel. Obstructions in the module were estimated
from recent ISS photographs. As shown in Fig. 7, the six air supply diffusers within the module are positioned such
that the flow is across the ceiling and down the port wall establishing a rotational flow pattern (counter-clockwise
facing forward). Two IMV diffusers (one aft-port, the other forward-starboard) direct flow along the floor in the
forward and aft directions. For this simulation, smoke sources were modeled as soot-emitting propane burner with a
fixed heat flux and located at the center of each Integrated Standard Payload Rack (ISPR). Circumferential profiles
of detection time were constructed by moving the smoke source around the module on each of the four walls. The
strength of the smoke source was varied to determine the effect of smoke source on alarm time.
Typical variations in the timeStarboard
to-alarm as a function of location
of the smoke source are shown in
Fig. 8. The shortest alarm time
resulted when both IMV flows
were present and there were no
Aft
obstructions (red bars). The
transport of smoke along the
Forward
length of the module is reduced
when the forward IMV flow is
removed making the results more
dependent on the location of the
Port
smoke source and the presence of
obstructions. For these conditions,
Figure 7. Geometry of the ISS Destiny Module used for the smoke
the time-to-alarm varied from
about 15 sec to approximately 90
detector evaluation. Supply diffusers are on the upper wall (blue) and
sec. The time-to-alarm increased
the return registers are on the floor (green)
significantly as weaker smoke
sources were used. In addition to determining the proper location for fire detectors, this tool is useful to analyze
potential fire and fire response scenarios (Deliverable 3). The analysis for the Destiny Lab Module will continue in
FY07 culminating in a comprehensive report of the results. As the CEV design develops, a similar analysis will be
initiated for this vehicle.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 8. Typical results of the smoke detector activation
modeling in the ISS Destiny module.

C. Fire Suppression and Response
NASA’s design philosophy is to control ignition sources and material usage so that the likelihood of a fire on a
spacecraft is very small. However, because the potential impact of a fire on the mission and safety of the crew,
methods for fire suppression are always provided. Worse than not having a fire extinguisher on board is having one
that is ineffective at extinguishing the types of fires that may be experienced or that behaves unexpectedly in low-g
so as to render it ineffective. The objective of the tasks in this area is to develop the data and experience with various
suppressants and suppressant systems to ensure they will perform as expected if ever needed.
1. Effectiveness of Fire Suppressants in Low-g (Deliverable 5)
The objective of this task is to quantify the effectiveness of candidate suppressants in reduced gravity.
Surprisingly, one of the primary issues facing the fire suppression and response technology development area is to
determine the proper suppression agents to investigate. There are many different agents and methods that could be
used to extinguish a fire depending on the type of material burning, the ambient atmosphere, and the volume of the
spacecraft, to name a few. The variation in suppression effectiveness with these variables can range from being
slightly less effective that it could be to becoming completely ineffective. In fact, the use of an inappropriate
suppression agent might even produce a more harmful environment for the crew. The parameters and characteristics
that will constrain the selection of a fire suppression agent depend on CEV design parameters that are only now
becoming more firm and will be incorporated into our tasks as they become known.
Because gaseous CO2 was used as the fire suppression agent on the ISS, recent studies have focused on
understanding the relative effectiveness and quantifying the minimum extinction concentration for passive gaseous
suppression agents, such as CO2, N2, Ar, and He. In these investigations, various experimental configurations are
being used including opposed-flow diffusion flames,24 cup burners,25-27 and PMMA cylinders.28 Several of these
studies are continuing and new ground-based and low-g data are still being analyzed. Two significant issues are that
(1) the studies have been performed in NASA’s Reduced Gravity Aircraft for which the low-g duration is
approximately 20 sec and (2) all low-g studies have been performed using small-scale laboratory configurations.
Demonstration of low-g fire suppression at realistic scales is practically essential for final evaluation of a fire
suppression system.
To address the lack of fire extinction data in an extended low-gravity environment, the Flame Extinguishment
Experiment (FLEX) will be conducted in the Multi-User Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) in the
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on the ISS. This experiment will provide unique low-gravity data on the
extinction effectiveness and mechanisms of several gaseous fire suppressants using a droplet geometry for which
11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

some of the complex extinction processes can be elucidated. The critical Damköhler number will be extracted from
the flame properties and droplet diameter at the time of extinction and used to relate data between the droplet and
other configurations. The Limiting Oxygen Index (LOI) will also be measured as a function of pressure and oxygen
concentration to determine the lowest O2 concentration that will sustain a low-gravity flame. Detailed simulations of
the combustion process made possible by this data will be used to produce simplified models of combustion kinetics
that can be used in the large-scale simulations of fire scenarios to be discussed in Section C.3. While the FLEX
project is being conducted under the ISS Research Project instead of the FPDS project, the data will greatly add to
our knowledge of low-gravity fire suppression and improve the quality and applicability of the product in
Deliverable 6. The MDCA and CIR hardware is scheduled to launch to the ISS on ULF-2 in July 2008.
A critical step in understanding low-g fire suppression is to reconcile the results of studies performed to date that
have made use of various configurations, fuels, suppressant agents, and gravity levels. This effort was begun in a
trade study on low-g fire suppression that was performed in FY06. This study reviewed existing data and evaluated
the effectiveness of various agents for fire suppression in the CEV. As more data is obtained and documented, the
results will be expanded and used not only in trade studies of fire suppressants for CEV and LSAM but also to
indicate specific knowledge gaps that must be filled by additional testing, analysis, or modeling.
2. Suppressant Dispersion Methods (Deliverable 5)
The objective of this task is to characterize the large-scale deployment of a suppressant in low-gravity. As
expected, investigation of the dispersion method presumes that the suppressant has been selected. Also, it is very
difficult to perform useful dispersion experiments on small scale geometries because of the dependence of the
injection and mixing phenomena on scale, especially if a liquid or foam suppressant is used. We anticipate that once
a fire suppressant system for CEV is selected, tests or numerical simulations can be conducted to investigate its
dispersion characteristics in low- and reduced gravity. In the interim, tasks in this area involve limited experiments
and numerical simulations of gaseous suppressant dispersion. Because gaseous CO2 was used as the suppressant
agent on the U.S. modules of the ISS, simulations have been performed of CO2 dispersion in the CIR and compared
with experimental measurements. Researchers are developing computational models of the early CEV designs to use
in both these simulations and those required to model contaminant transport, as discussed in Section B.3 (PI: Dr. D.
P. Stocker, NASA GRC).
3. Evaluation of Spacecraft Fire Suppression (Deliverable 3 and 5)
The evaluation of spacecraft fire suppression systems requires the melding of the technologies developed by the
definition of fire scenarios, modeling of smoke and contaminant transport and detection (Section B.3), knowledge of
fire suppressant effectiveness (experiment and modeling) (Section C.1), and verified simulations of suppressant
dispersion (Section C.2). This task will use all of the applicable tools developed in this project to evaluate the
effectiveness of the detection and suppression systems to respond to a credible fire source. Because of the number of
variables involved, this analysis is only meaningful if actual geometry, credible fire sources, and anticipated
ventilation characteristics are used. However, the more comprehensive a numerical simulation is required to be, the
more it becomes tailored to that specific configuration and set of conditions. Codes tailored for terrestrial analyses
are not directly applicable to spacecraft without preliminary assessment and, in some cases, extensive modification.
Several grants were begun in the Spacecraft Fire Safety program that have been investigating how to apply tools
developed for terrestrial fire analysis, specifically in buildings and on board ships, to spacecraft applications. These
efforts include “Large-Scale Fire Dynamics in Spacecraft in Reduced Gravity” (PI: Dr. G. Linteris, National
Institute of Standards and Technology), “Fire Suppression and Safety in reduced Gravity Environments” (co-I: Drs.
K. Kailasanath and D. Schwer, Naval Research Laboratory), and “Development of an Engineering Tool for the
Determination of Suppression Device Placement in Reduced Gravity Environments” (PI: Dr. R. Roby, Combustion
Science and Engineering, Inc.). These grants have received their final funding and will be completing work in FY07.
As the FPDS tasks develop and the design of the CEV solidifies, formal tasks in this area will be defined. The
approach will be two-pronged, i.e., analysis tasks that directly support Orion and tasks that incorporate and the
FPDS deliverables will be incorporated into specific tools

V. Conclusions
The Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression project is a technology development effort that addresses all
aspects of fire safety aboard crewed exploration systems. This paper has identified the six deliverables for this FPDS
project that are in the form of hardware, software, and/or information (e.g., data libraries). Even though they were
formulated prior to the announcement of the VSE, these deliverables have remained essentially intact because they
12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

address NASA’s basic philosophy for preventing fires on spacecraft. It is anticipated that they will continue to
remain relevant throughout the exploration missions. The status, accomplishments and plans for each of the major
tasks within the FPDS project were also presented in this paper. The teams of scientists and technicians that are
conducting these tasks provide NASA’s primary expertise in reduced gravity fire behavior as well as fire detection
and suppression. These technologies play a very important role in the implementation of the Vision for Space
Exploration.
In addition to performing the tasks identified in the FY07 FPDS Integrated Baseline Review and summarized in
this paper, a primary activity in the coming year will be to infuse these technologies into the Constellation and CEV
requirements and designs. This will be done both by working with the Exploration Technology Development
Program Office and, more importantly, with NASA and contractor CEV designers. Throughout the on-going design
of the CEV and the LSAM to follow, the most critical aspects of the FPDS project will be to (1) continue to make
progress on all of the deliverables so that they can be infused into the CxP when needed, (2) be responsive to the
NASA and contractor CEV development team as their designs progress and (3) participate in NASA-wide working
groups and standard development activities to have input to the design and operational requirements for exploration
habitats and vehicles. Undoubtedly, budget and technical challenges will continue but, similar to NASA’s
implementation of the VSE, the personnel in the FPDS project will adjust to continue to deliver relevant fire safety
technologies to the exploration mission.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the efforts of all of the individuals who are conducting and assisting the
tasks that make up the FPDS project. Of particular note are Dr. Fletcher J. Miller (NCSER) and Dr. Daniel L.
Dietrich (NASA GRC), the Leads for the Material Flammability Research Team and the Fire Suppression and
Response Research Team, respectively. Their effort and dedication contribute greatly to the definition, formulation,
and performance of each of the tasks described in this paper. Their help in leading this project is greatly appreciated.

References
1

Urban, D. L. and King, M. K. “NASA’s Microgravity Combustion Research Program: Past and Future,” Comb. and Flame,
Vol. 116, No. 3, February 1999.
2
Ruff, G. A., Urban, D L., and King, M. K. “A Research Plan for Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression in Crewed
Exploration Systems,” AIAA-2005-0341, 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 10-13, 2005.
3
Ruff, G. A., Urban, D L., and King, M. K. “Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression Research Supporting Manned Space
Exploration – One Year Later,” AIAA-2005-0347, 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 912, 2006.
4
Ruff, G. A. (ed.), Research Needs in Fire Safety for the Human Exploration and Utilization of Space: Proceedings and
Research Plan, NASA CP-2003-212103, April 2003.
5
Sacksteder, K. (ed.), Seventh International Workshop on Microgravity Combustion and Chemically Reacting Systems,
NASA CP-2003-212376, June 2003.
6
Margle, J. M. (ed.), Spacecraft Fire Safety, NASA CP-2476, August 1987.
7
Apostolakis, G. E., Catton, I., Paulos, T., Paxton, K., and Jones, S., “Findings of a Review of Spacecraft Fire Safety Needs,”
NASA CR-189181, 1992.
8
Youngblood, W. N. and Vedha-Nayagam, M., “Advanced Spacecraft Fire Safety: Proposed Projects and Program Plan,”
NASA CR-185147, 1989.
9
Reuther, J. J., “Definition of Experiments to Investigate Fire Suppressants in Microgravity,” NASA CR 185295, 1990.
10
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technical Standard 6001, “Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and
Compatiblity Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That Support Combustion”, 1998.
11
Cordova, J. L., Walther, D. C., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Steinhaus, T., Torero, J.L., Quintiere, J. G., and Ross, H. D., “Flow
Effects on the Flammability Diagrams of Solid Fuels: Microgravity Influence on Ignition Delay,” in Sacksteder, Kurt, ed.: Fifth
International Microgravity Workshop. NASA/CP-1999-20817, May 1999, pp. 35-38.
12
Olson, S. L., Beeson, H., and Haas, J. P., “An Earth-Based Equivalent Low Stretch Apparatus to Assess Material
Flammability for Microgravity and Extraterrestrial Fire-Safety Applications,” Seventh International Workshop on Microgravity
Combustion and Chemically Reacting Systems, NASA CP-2003-212376, June 2003, pp. 213-216.
13
Incropera, F. P. and DeWitt, D. P. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1990.
14
Olson, S. L., Miller, F. J., and Wichman, I. S., “Characteristics of the Flamelet Regime of Flame Spread”, 4th Joint Meeting
of the U.S. Sections of the Combustion Institute, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, March 20-23, 2005.
15
Quintiere, J. G. “A Theoretical Basis for Flammability Properties,” Fire Mater. Vol. 30, 2006, pp. 175-214.
16
Tewarson, A. “Generation of Heat and Chemical Compounds in Fires,” The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection
Engineering (3rd ed). Section 3, Chapter 4. The National Fire Protection Association Press: Quincy, MA 2002, pp. 3-161.

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

17
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) Materials and Processes Technical Information System (MAPTIS),
http://maptis.nasa.gov; also, MSFC-HDBK-527/JSC 09604.
18
Olson, S. L. “Mechanisms of Microgravity Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel: Oxygen and Opposed Flow Effects,”
Comb. Science and Tech., Vol. 76, 1991, pp. 233-249.
18
Feier, I. I., Kleinhenz, J., T’ien, J. S., Ferkul, P. V., and Sacksteder, K. R., “Pressure Modeling of Upward Flame Spread
Rates in Partial Gravity,” 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, AIAA-2005-0716, January 2005, Reno, NV.
20
Kleinhenz, J.E. “Flammability and Flame Spread of Nomex and Cellulose in Space Habitat Environments,” Ph.D.
Dissertation, Case Western Reserve University, May 2006.
21
Lange, K. E., Perka, A. T., Duffield, B. E., and Jeng, F. F. “Bounding the Spacecraft Atmosphere Design Space for Future
Exploration Missions,” NASA CR-2005-213689, 2005.
22
Olson, S .L., Ferkul, P. V., and T’ien, J. S., “Near-Limit Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel in Microgravity,” TwentySecond International Symposium on Combustion, The Combustion Institute, pp. 1213-1222.
23
Urban, D. L., Griffin, D., Ruff, G. A., Cleary, T., Yang, J., Mulholland, G., and Yuan, Z.-G. “Detection of Smoke from
Microgravity Fires,” Paper No. 2005-01-2930, 35th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Rome, Italy, July 11-14,
2005.
24
Hamins, A., Bundy, M., Puri, I. K., McGrattan, K., and Park, W. C., “Suppression of Low Strain Rate Nonpremixed Flames
by an Agent,” NASA CP-2001-210826, 2001, pp. 101-104.
25
Katta, V. R., Takahashi, F., and Linteris, G. T., “Suppression of Cup-Burner Flames Using Carbon Dioxide in
Microgravity,” Combustion and Flame, Vol. 137, 2004, pp. 506-522.
26
Takahashi, F., Linteris, G. T., and Katta, V. R., “Suppression Characteristics of Cup-Burner Flames in Low Gravity,”
AIAA-2004-0957, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
27
Takahashi, F., Linteris, G. T., and Katta, V. R., “Extinguishment Mechanisms of Cup-Burner Flames in Low Gravity,”
AIAA-2006-0745, 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2006.
28
Ruff, G. A., Hicks, M., and Pettegrew, R., “Assessment of CO2, N2, and He as Suppressant Agents in Microgravity,” Spring
Meeting of the Western States Section/The Combustion Institute, Davis, CA, March 2004.

14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

