NASA/TM—2008-215260

2008–01–2055

Microgravity Flame Spread in Exploration
Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen, and Velocity
Effects on Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread

Sandra L. Olson and Gary A. Ruff
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Fletcher J. Miller
San Diego State University, San Diego, California

August 2008

NASA STI Program . . . in Proﬁle

Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI)
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain
this important role.
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices
of the Agency Chief Information Ofﬁcer. It collects,
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which
includes the following report types:
•

•

papers from scientiﬁc and technical
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
•

SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
technical, or historical information from
NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
concerned with subjects having substantial
public interest.

•

TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. Englishlanguage translations of foreign scientiﬁc and
technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.

Specialized services also include creating custom
thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major signiﬁcant phase
of research that present the results of NASA
programs and include extensive data or theoretical
analysis. Includes compilations of signiﬁcant
scientiﬁc and technical data and information
deemed to be of continuing reference value.
NASA counterpart of peer-reviewed formal
professional papers but has less stringent
limitations on manuscript length and extent of
graphic presentations.

For more information about the NASA STI
program, see the following:

TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc
and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
reports, working papers, and bibliographies that
contain minimal annotation. Does not contain
extensive analysis.

•

CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and
technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.

•

CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected

•

Access the NASA STI program home page at
http://www.sti.nasa.gov

•

E-mail your question via the Internet to help@
sti.nasa.gov

•

Fax your question to the NASA STI Help Desk
at 301–621–0134

•

Telephone the NASA STI Help Desk at
301–621–0390

•

Write to:
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information (CASI)
7115 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076–1320

NASA/TM—2008-215260

2008–01–2055

Microgravity Flame Spread in Exploration
Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen, and Velocity
Effects on Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread

Sandra L. Olson and Gary A. Ruff
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Fletcher J. Miller
San Diego State University, San Diego, California

Prepared for the
38th International Conference on Environmental Systems
sponsored by the Society of Automotive Engineers International
San Francisco, California, June 28–July 2, 2008

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135

August 2008

Acknowledgments

The research at NASA Glenn’s Zero Gravity Research Facility was supported by NASA’s Fire Prevention, Detection,
and Suppression Program. We thank the personnel of the NASA Glenn Zero Gravity Research
Facility for upgrading the experiment apparatus and conducting the drop testing.
We thank Glenn’s Spacecraft Fire Prevention team for reviewing this work.

Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation
only. Their usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial endorsement,
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.

Level of Review: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.

Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information
7115 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076–1320

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springﬁeld, VA 22161

Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov

Microgravity Flame Spread in Exploration Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen,
and Velocity Effects on Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread
Sandra L. Olson and Gary A. Ruff
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Fletcher J. Miller
San Diego State University
San Diego, California 92182
One of the major lessons learned from the Apollo 1 fire is
that it is impossible to eliminate all ignition sources (ref. 2), so
fire prevention is achieved in spacecraft through material
control and the use of fire resistant materials. Since Skylab,
the Space Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS)
have operated at normal sea-level conditions (air, 21% oxygen/79% nitrogen by volume at 14.7 psia total pressure)
except for brief pre-EVA activities when oxygen levels are
increased for a short period of time to 30% oxygen while the
total pressure is lowered to 10.2 psia. Many of the materials
now used in the Shuttle or on ISS are therefore only tested and
rated to 30% oxygen at 10.2 psia.
The Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), Orion, and the lunar
lander, Altair, are designed to operate from 8.0 to 14.9 psia
and at a maximum of 30 and 34% oxygen concentration
respectively. The transition from higher pressure, lower
oxygen concentrations to lower pressure, higher oxygen
concentrations will occur as exploration needs change from
ISS crew exchange to lunar missions. As the oxygen concentration increases, the cabin pressure decreases to follow the
normoxic curve which keeps the partial pressure of oxygen
constant at the normal atmospheric air equivalent of 0.21 atm,
or 3.09 psia. The partial pressure of oxygen in the spacecraft
will be controlled to 2.6 to 3.1 psia, which creates a band of
operating conditions on the hypoxic side of the normoxic
curve.
NASA tests materials for flammability using NASA STD6001 Test 1 (ref. 3), which is an upward burning test at the
worst-case atmospheric conditions in which the material will
be used. Materials that do not self-extinguish after 6 in. of
burning must undergo other special considerations and/or tests
if they are to be used on spacecraft. During the early stages of
the Constellation Program (CxP), NASA Materials and
Processes (M&P) personnel realized that changes to the
baseline oxygen concentration during vehicle development or
from vehicle to vehicle during the implementation of the CxP
would require repeated testing of many materials to document
their flammability at the new baseline.
Anticipating these changes in the baseline oxygen concentration, NASA set out to determine the maximum oxygen
concentration (MOC) for a set of spacecraft materials identified by NASA M&P personnel. (The MOC was defined as the

Abstract
Microgravity tests of flammability and flame spread were
performed in a low-speed flow tunnel to simulate spacecraft
ventilation flows. Three thin fuels were tested for flammability
(Ultem 1000 (General Electric Company), 10 mil film, Nomex
(Dupont) HT90-40, and Mylar G (Dupont) and one fuel for
flame spread testing (Kimwipes (Kimberly-Clark Worldwide,
Inc.). The 1g Upward Limiting Oxygen Index (ULOI) and 1g
Maximum Oxygen Concentration (MOC) are found to be
greater than those in 0g, by up to 4% oxygen mole fraction,
meaning that the fuels burned in 0g at lower oxygen concentrations than they did using the NASA Standard 6001 Test 1
protocol.
Flame spread tests with Kimwipes were used to develop
correlations that capture the effects of flow velocity, oxygen
concentration, and pressure on flame spread rate. These
correlations were used to determine that over virtually the
entire range of spacecraft atmospheres and flow conditions,
the opposed spread is faster, especially for normoxic atmospheres. The correlations were also compared with 1g MOC for
various materials as a function of pressure and oxygen. The
lines of constant opposed flow agreed best with the 1g MOC
trends, which indicates that Test 1 limits are essentially
dictated by the critical heat flux for ignition. Further evaluation of these and other materials is continuing to better understand the 0g flammability of materials and its effect on the
oxygen margin of safety.

Introduction
For future space missions, NASA is planning to increase
the oxygen concentration and reduce the total pressure of the
atmosphere in the Orion crew exploration vehicle, the Altair
lander, and future lunar habitats (ref. 1). This atmosphere has
the advantages of requiring a lower mass of inert gas (N2),
lowering vehicle internal pressures, and shortening or eliminating the pre-breathing time required to purge nitrogen from
the bloodstream before Extra Vehicular Activity (EVA).
However, an enriched oxygen atmosphere also has a significant disadvantage—increased flammability of materials.

NASA/TM—2008-215260

1

~5 sec in which to respond to the new atmosphere by either
extinguishing (0g MOC) or shrinking to a reduced burning
state at the lower oxygen concentration. The lowest oxygen
concentration where the flame survived to the end of the drop
is considered the 0g ULOI. While some of these flames may
extinguish given longer time, the limits provided by the Zero
Gravity Research Facility tests are a conservative measure of
the limits in 0g. Note these limits are not identical to the 1g
limits due to the intrinsic limitations of the drop time, but they
are a reasonable comparison.
Tests were performed using a fuel sample taped to a sheet
metal sample holder with an igniter wire on either the upstream or downstream end of the 5-cm wide by 10-cm long
sample (fig. 2). The flow was started before the drop to
establish a steady flow speed and pressure in the tunnel prior
to the drop rig release. The hot wire igniter was energized
either in 1g or at release, depending on the objective of the test
(flammability limit tests used 1g ignition; flame spread tests
used 0g ignition). The microgravity period lasted 5.18 sec—
the first 2 sec of which are typically used for 0g ignition and
flame spread away from the igniter. When the drop rig reaches
the bottom of the evacuated drop shaft and stops in the deceleration cart, the test section is vented to vacuum to extinguish
the flame.

maximum oxygen concentration at which a material passed
the standard 1-g flammability test, NASA-STD-6001 Test 1.
The measurement of the MOC using the standard Test 1
protocol has been evaluated (refs. 4 to 7) to provide additional
information about the flammability limits of the material and
not just a pass/fail statement regarding its use in the worstcase atmosphere. This approach allows a better understanding
of the margin of safety for the material in the real-use atmosphere, but has not been formally approved as a standard test.
In this approach (ref. 5), the oxygen concentration in Test 1
is successively reduced to identify the Upward Limiting
Oxygen Index (1g ULOI) and the Maximum Oxygen Concentration (1g MOC) that consistently results in selfextinguishment of the material. The 1g ULOI is defined as the
oxygen concentration at which a material passes the NASA
STD 6001 Test 1 burn length criterion approximately half the
time. The 1g MOC is defined as the oxygen concentration
where at least five samples passed the burning criterion (ref. 3)
and where at least one sample failed in the environment that
contained 1 percent more oxygen by volume.
The objective of this work is to begin to assess the relative
flammability limits between Test 1 and concurrent flammability limits in microgravity, to better understand how the 1g
margins of fire safety in spacecraft environments are modified
in actual microgravity. Based on microgravity tests conducted
at various oxygen levels with three fuels tested previously by
WSTF (ref. 8), we define an oxygen margin of safety parameter that can be used to assess material safety in the intended
use atmosphere. In addition, the effects of oxygen concentration, pressure, and forced flow velocity are studied to understand how changing the atmosphere along the normoxic curve
affects the robustness of the flame as measured by flame
spread rate.

Experimental Apparatus
The microgravity tests are performed in a low-speed flow
tunnel that provides 0 to 30 cm/s forced flow of gas (0 to
100% O2 in diluent) through a 20 cm ID duct at 0 to 14.7 psia
pressure. The flow tunnel is mounted on a NASA Zero Gravity Research Facility drop rig bus (ref. 9), but with modifications to the flow system and software control. The flow system
of the rig is shown schematically in figure 1. The flow modifications include a second gas reservoir such that oxygen
concentrations (or another parameter such as diluent or extinguishing agent) can be changed during a test and a new back
pressure control valve for greater flow capacity of up to
30 cm/s at pressures up to 14.7 psia. Higher permeability
porous plates and honeycomb were installed to improve the
flow distribution and laminarity at these higher flow rates. For
the material flammability tests, the switching of the flow
between source bottles was timed so that the sample was
ignited in an enriched oxygen concentration greater than the
1g ULOI, and the test oxygen level reached the sample shortly
after release into zero gravity. The established flame then had

NASA/TM—2008-215260

Figure 1.—Schematic of the flow system on the Drop Bus. Two
separate bottles can contain two gas mixtures so that conditions
(oxygen concentration, diluent, pressure) can be switched during the experiment if needed. A critical flow orifice controls the
flow through the test chamber, while a back pressure valve
controls the pressure in the chamber. The sample and orange
igniter are shown within the chamber.

2

N

Nomex HT90-40

Mylar G

Ultem 1000
(10 mil)

Figure 3.—Front view pictures of microgravity flames on three
different fuels samples at the ULOI. The concurrent forced flow
velocity was 30 cm/s. The red LED in lower left is the same
true brightness, giving an indication of the relative brightness
between the flames. The green LED was not used for the Mylar
as it caused too much specular reflection.

Material Flammability Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.—(a) Front view of a Kimwipes fuel sample in the 0.5 mm
thick stainless steel holder, showing a concurrent flame test at
24% oxygen, 30 cm/s, 6.4 psia (not near limit). The cutout in the
holder is 5- by 10-cm for the sample, but the holder itself is
20-cm wide and over 35-cm long, extending 12.7 cm upstream
of the sample. The Kimwipes sample appears green due to the
LED illumination. The igniter can be positioned at either end of
the sample, so both opposed or concurrent (shown) tests can be
done in the same holder. (b) Side view of same flame. The constant intensity red LEDs in both views was used to judge the
actual flame brightness, since the camera was on auto-gain.

Materials flammability tests were conducted for three materials and the 1g ULOI and 1g MOC were compared with 0g
values obtained at a concurrent flow of 30 cm/s, which is a
reasonable maximum local spacecraft ventilation velocity
(ref. 11). The limiting oxygen values for each fuel are found in
table 1, and flame images for near limit 0g flames are shown
in figure 3. The near-limit flames are generally small and
localized to the upstream edge of the material. We noticed that
any distortion of the burned edge of the material, such as
curling, swelling, or contracting, weakens the flame apparently by influencing the flow around the burned edge. Since
oxygen transport is critical to microgravity flames, anything
that reduces the free flow of oxygen past the sample will
reduce the material’s flammability.

The fuels used in this study include Kimwipes, Ultem 1000,
Nomex HT90-40, and Mylar G. Kimwipes are tested to
expand the database for thin cellulose fuel that chars as it
burns but is not treated for fire resistance. Front and side view
images of a Kimwipes burn are shown in figure 2. With this
fuel we can obtain flame spread and extinction data in the
limited microgravity test time. Ultem 1000 (fire retarded
polyetherimide (PEI)) in 10 mil thick film is inherently flameretarding, with self-charring characteristics, a very low smoke
signature, very low smoke toxicity, and a low heat-release
rate. Nomex HT90-40 is a 12 mil thick fire retarded aromatic
nylon fabric which does not melt or drip as it burns. When
exposed to a heat source, the Nomex fibers swell and seal the
spaces between the fibers, stopping air movement through the
fabric and thus inhibiting heat transfer through the fabric.
Mylar G is a 5 mil thick plastic film made from polyethylene
terephthalate. It is not fire-retarded, melts as it burns, and was
selected primarily for its non-charring character.
Ignition and flame spread were recorded by two orthogonal
color video cameras with automatic gain control; sample
images are shown in figure 2. Flame shape, size, and spread
rate were measured using Spotlight software (ref. 10). Relative
luminosity is compared between video frames using a constant
brightness red LED in the corner of the images which also
flashes at release marking the drop in the video.

NASA/TM—2008-215260

TABLE 1.—COMPARISON OF 1G AND 0G
FLAMMABILITY LIMITS FOR THREE FUELS
Fuel

Nomex HT90-40
fabric
Ultem 1000,
10 mil
Mylar G

1g
ULOI

1g
MOC

25.4% O2
(±0.6),
14.7 psia*
26.5% O2,
10.2 psia*

22% O2,
14.7 psia*

20.8% O2,
10.2 psia*

20% O2,
10.2 psia*

24% O2,
10.2 psia*

0g
0g
ULOI
MOC
(burns) (extinguishes)
23% O2,
22% O2,
14.7 psia,
14.7 psia,
30 cm/s
30 cm/s
24% O2,
23% O2,
10.2 psia,
10.2 psia,
30 cm/s
30 cm/s
17% O2,
16% O2,
10.2 psia,
10.2 psia,
30 cm/s
30 cm/s

*WSTF data (ref. 8)

An example flammability map is shown in figure 4 for
Ultem 1000, where the 1g limits are compared to 0g test
results over a range of flow and oxygen concentrations. The
observed minimum in the flammability curve is for concurrent
flow at the highest velocities achievable in the drop rig
(30 cm/s), so the remaining fuels were tested at 30 cm/s
concurrent flow.

3

the test was taken as the 0g MOC. A positive ΔO2%0g–1g
means that the flame will propagate in 1g at lower oxygen
concentrations than in 0g. Conversely, a negative ΔO2%0g–1g
means that the flame will propagate in 0g at a lower oxygen
concentration than in 1g and would result in a reduced margin
of safety.
For example, Ultem film is used aboard the Space Shuttle
and the International Space Station, both of which have a
nominal atmosphere of 21% oxygen ± 2% oxygen. In 1g, the
mean flammability limit for Ultem is 25.25%, which is at least
2.25% above the nominal range for the atmosphere. However,
in 0g the mean flammability limit is 22.5%, which falls within
the nominal range for the atmosphere, indicating the material
could burn if ignited. The ΔO2%0g–1g = –2.75% is a significant
negative margin of safety that needs to be considered when
deciding if a material is safe for use in spacecraft.
As shown in figure 5, the 1g flammability limits are generally not conservative for these materials as evidenced by the
negative ΔO2%0g–1g, by up to –4% oxygen. For concurrent
(upward) flow conditions, it is reasonable for materials to be
flammable at lower oxygen concentration in low-g than in 1-g
because in the absence of buoyancy, the heat loss due to convective flow is greatly reduced. As such, the flame doesn’t have
to release as much heat as in 1g to provide the same amount of
heat flux to the unburned fuel. Thus, it is not surprising that the
0g flammability limits are lower than the 1g flammability limits,
which is the general trend noted in table 1. The evaluation of the
magnitude of this ΔO2%0g-1g for other materials is continuing for
concurrent flammability limits, to be followed by evaluation of
the limits for opposed flow.

Figure 4.—Ultem 1000, 10 mil film, flammability map as a function of flow and oxygen%, with the pressure held constant at
10.2 psia. Most of the tests were conducted with concurrent
forced flow velocity, but two were with opposed flow. The thick
curved line indicates the approximate division between flammable and non-flammable conditions. Near the boundary the same
conditions can yield different results due to the randomness of
the flames and the samples curling which affects the airflow.

Flame Spread Results
The 0g ULOI and 0g MOC measurements discussed in the
previous section allow the difference between 1g and 0g
oxygen flammability limits (or thresholds) to be quantified.
However, this data does not quantify the difference in flammability at oxygen concentrations above the 0g MOC. As
previously stated, atmospheres used in exploration vehicles
will generally lie along the normoxic curve, i.e., the locus of
ambient pressure/oxygen concentration combinations having
the same oxygen partial pressure as standard sea level conditions. It would be useful to quantify material flammability
along this curve so that trades between oxygen concentration
and ambient pressure can be performed.
One way to determine relative flammability along the normoxic curve is to use flame spread as a measure of flammability. In this section, we describe the flame spread tests, develop
correlations between forced flow velocity, oxygen concentration, and pressures to collapse the data onto a single curve, and
finally extrapolate them to the normoxic condition.
Thirty concurrent and ten opposed flow flame spread tests
were conducted with Kimwipes to evaluate the effects of flow,
pressure, and oxygen on the robustness of the flame. The flow
velocity varied between 0 and 30 cm/s, the pressure varied
between 3.6 and 14.7 psia, and the oxygen percentage ranged

Figure 5.—1g and 0g flammability limits for three fuels, and the
ΔO2% on the Test 1 margin of safety identified for each fuel,
with error bars based on the differences between the ULOI and
MOC.

Figure 5 compares the flammability limits from table 1
graphically, and evaluates the oxygen margin of safety for the
1g Test 1 data. The ΔO2 %0g–1g is defined here as the mean 0g
limit minus the mean 1g limit as follows:
⎛ (0gULO + 0gMOC⎞ ⎛ (1gULO + 1gMOC⎞
ΔO 2 %0g−1g = ⎜
⎟ −⎜
⎟
2
2
⎝
⎠ ⎝
⎠

(1)

In this equation, the lowest percent O2 at which the material
burned in 0g for the full test was taken as the 0g ULOI; the
maximum percent O2 where the material extinguished during

NASA/TM—2008-215260

4

from 24 to 85%. Spread rates were measured from the video
for each test condition. Flame tracking was generally done
with the edge view either manually or using an appropriate
threshold value for the target. A more detailed report of these
results can be found in (ref. 12).
Correlations were developed to capture the effect of all
three of the variables (flow, pressure, oxygen) on the measured flame spread rate.
For normal gravity, downward (opposed flow) flame spread
over thin fuels, previous investigators found the flame spread
rate correlated with (O2)0.9(P)0.05, with oxygen in mole-fraction
and pressure in atm. (ref. 13). There was only a sight pressure
dependence noted, so the primary influence on spread rate was
from the oxygen concentration in this buoyantly controlled
situation.
We found that our new data, as well as previous data from
both normal and microgravity (refs. 14 to 16), were wellcorrelated by this relationship except near the quench limit
where flow effects play a role. The results are shown figure 6,
where new data as well as those from (refs. 14 and 15) are
shown. The spread rate increases nearly linearly with oxygen
percentage, while the pressure effect is quite weak in this
range. This is in contrast with Bhattacharjee et al. (ref. 17),
who showed a much stronger dependence on pressure for fourfold thicker fuel in a quiescent environment. Those tests were
shown to be near-limit, where heat losses such as radiation
become important. Indeed, even the near-limit data from
(refs. 14 and 15) show a fall off from the correlation. Thus, the
correlation can be viewed as a worst-case (i.e., highest)
prediction of spread rate for a given oxygen and pressure
condition.
For concurrent spread, there was no such correlation of
experimental data in the literature that we could find, perhaps
because in normal gravity the flame spread rate is often
acceleratory. Ferkul (ref. 18) did correlate his numerical
predictions of spread rate as a function of oxygen and forced
flow velocity in a polynomial expression, and noted the spread
rate increases approximately linearly with either flow velocity
or oxygen percentage.
The best fit of the available experimental data was obtained
by using the correlation parameter shown in figure 7, which
captures the linear dependencies we observed for flow and
oxygen, and a square root variation with pressure. Here, all
our data are shown, along with some earlier near-limit data
from Grayson (ref. 19) and Pettegrew (ref. 20). The normoxic
data ranged from 24% oxygen at 12.8 psia to 85% oxygen at
3.6 psia, all at 30 cm/s flow. The oxygen varies from 24 to
50% oxygen at 10.2 psia and 30 cm/s. Velocity varies from
1 to 30 cm/s at 34% oxygen and 10.2 psia. Pressure varies
from 5 to 14.7 psia at 40% oxygen and 30 cm/s. For most of
the range, the spread rate depends linearly on the correlation
parameter, but at very low near-limit values the data show a
fall off from the linear fit, as predicted (ref. 21). A power law
fit is shown for comparison in figure 7.

NASA/TM—2008-215260

Figure 6.—Flame spread data for Kimwipes, fit to an oxygenpressure correlation based on Magee and McAlevy (ref. 13) for
opposed flow under a variety of atmospheric and gravitational
conditions. Flow velocity is not captured in this correlation due to
the non-monotonic dependence of flame spread at low oxygen
concentrations (<40%); below an optimum velocity the flame
spread rate increases, and above that it decreases. Above 40%
oxygen, the flame spread rate is independent of forced velocity.

Figure 7.—Concurrent flame spread correlation for Kimwipes
combining the effects of forced flow velocity, oxygen concentration, and ambient pressure. The symbols are sized to reflect the
estimated error bars based on comparing top and bottom base
spread rates. Data from references 18 and 19 are also shown
for comparison. A linear fit to all the data is y=0.2498x+0.4038,
with R2=0.97. A power law fit to the data is y=0.6763x0.6187 with
R2=0.93.

Figure 8 applies both flame correlations developed above to
determine the boundary where concurrent spread is faster than
opposed flame spread. To create this figure, we equate the
opposed and concurrent flame spread rates and then solve for
the forced flow velocity that makes them equal as a function
of oxygen concentration. This was done for two pressures: the
normoxic equivalent pressure and 14.7 psia. It is seen that
over virtually the entire range of spacecraft atmospheres and
flow conditions (5 to 20 cm/s nominal range (ref. 11) the

5

Figure 9.—Opposed and concurrent flame spread for Kimwipes
plotted as a function of oxygen concentration in the normoxic
atmosphere. The correlations are used for the predictions.

Figure 8.—Oxygen and velocity map showing the region where
concurrent flame spread for Kimwipes is faster than opposed flow
flame spread in microgravity. The curves were obtained from the
linear correlation equations based on the experimental data. The
results are shown for two total pressures, the pressure corresponding to normoxic conditions at the particular oxygen mole
fraction, and 1 atm. Opposed spread is faster below the lines.
Also shown is the nominal space craft ventilation range, demonstrating that in virtually all situations the opposed spread is more
rapid.

plausible that the flammability limits in 0g may also be
different, especially for materials whose limits lie at higher
oxygen concentrations along the normoxic curve, and should
be investigated in future work.

Discussion
opposed spread is faster, especially for the normoxic case.
However, in the range of 20 to 25% oxygen, the flame spread
rate for opposed and concurrent flow are similar, consistent
with the data shown in figure 4. Furthermore, for the realistic
scenario of a sample ignited in a central region rather than at
an edge the flame will spread upstream. Any downstream
flame would be even further inhibited by the vitiated atmosphere generated by the upstream flame.
The different response of opposed and concurrent flame
spread to the normoxic atmosphere is shown in figure 9. For
opposed flow, the flame spread increases rapidly with increasing oxygen concentration in the normoxic atmosphere. In
contrast, the concurrent flame spread more slowly increases
with increasing oxygen concentration as the falling pressure
counteracts the increasing oxygen concentration. While this
figure shows that the flame spread rate increases as the percent
O2 increases along the normoxic curve, the magnitude of the
change depends on the direction of the spread. Opposed (or
upwind) spread increases from about 1 to 5 cm/s as percent O2
goes from 21 to 80%. Concurrent (or downwind) flame spread
increases only from about 3 to 4 cm/s over this same range of
percent O2 for 30 cm/s forced flow. The difference between
the opposed and concurrent 15 cm/s forced flow results is
even larger. This trend should be investigated using other
types of materials.
Also, recall that the 0g OC data in the previous section were
obtained mostly in a concurrent flow configuration. Since the
data in figure 9 shows that the flame spread rates between
concurrent and opposed flow are significantly different, it is

NASA/TM—2008-215260

The Test 1 materials flammability data published by WSTF
(ref. 7) demonstrate that the 1g MOCs are not generally a
strong function of pressure but instead vary primarily with
oxygen concentration. This is somewhat surprising given that
Test 1 is an upward flame spread test and the current results
showed a square root dependence on pressure shown above for
forced flow concurrent flame spread. Also, the partial gravity
correlations for upward flame spread developed by Kleinhenz
et al., showed a P2-g dependence (refs. 22 and 23). In spite of
this data, the 1g MOC is not a strong function of pressure and
we examine this trend here.
We plot the flammability data from (ref. 7) in figure 10
along with the normoxic curve and lines of constant flame
spread rate from the above flame spread correlations for both
opposed flow and concurrent flow. Notice that the 1g MOC
data obtained from Test 1 results in nearly vertical lines for the
different fuels: to the right of the line the materials are flammable, but to the left of the line they are not. There are a few
exceptions to the near-vertical flammability lines, and those
fuels appear to have halogen species in common (fuels indicated with an asterisk). Halogens are known to scavenge free
radicals in the gas-phase, which inhibits the gas-phase reaction
and thus the heat release from the flame. So these fuels have a
stronger dependence on pressure, where at low pressure the
increased diffusive mixing results in increased scavenging.
The reduced heat release results in a higher oxygen limit at
low pressure.
The lack of pressure dependence of the flammability data
agrees better with the lines of constant flame spread rate for

6

Figure 10.—MOC material flammability limits (ref. 7) compared to lines of constant spread rate
from the opposed and concurrent flame spread correlations. The normoxic curve is shown as
an indication of potential spacecraft atmospheres. The boxes shows the range of conditions
expected in the CEV and lunar lander. The experimental data agree better with the opposed
flow correlation, even though they were obtained in a concurrent configuration. The vertical
lines correspond to critical heat flux for ignition boundaries and the near limit upward spreading
flame is viable only for sufficient heat flux.

G). Kimwipes fuel supported a flame that spread rapidly
enough that flame spread rates could be obtained in the short
microgravity time. This was the first time that two of the fuels,
Ultem 1000 and Mylar G), were tested in a microgravity
environment. The 1g ULOI and 1g MOC flammability limits
obtained from NASA Test 1 are compared to 0g limits for the
same fuel width. The 1g ULOI and 1g MOC are found to be
greater than those in 0g, by up to 4% oxygen mole fraction,
meaning that the fuels burned in 0g at lower oxygen concentrations than they did using the Test 1 protocol. While test
times in 0g are limited to 5.18 sec, these test data provide a
conservative estimate of the material’s flammability in 0g.
The flame spread tests were used to develop correlations
that capture the effects of flow velocity, oxygen concentration,
and pressures on flame spread rate. For the case of opposed
flow data, a previously determined correlation was found to be
valid away from the quench limit. No correlation with these
three variables for concurrent data existed, so our flame spread
correlation is the first to combine the effects of oxygen,
pressure, and forced flow velocity.
These correlations were used to determine the oxygen versus forced flow boundary where concurrent spread is faster
than opposed flame spread. This boundary revealed that over
virtually the entire range of spacecraft atmospheres and flow
conditions, the opposed spread is faster in microgravity,
especially for the normoxic case. The correlations were further
used to compare with 1g MOC limit trends of materials as a

the opposed flow correlation rather than the concurrent flow
correlation, as shown in figure 10. This is surprising as well,
since the flammability data is in an upward flame spread
configuration and one might expect the concurrent correlation
trend to agree better.
We propose that the upward flammability limit (1g MOC)
derived from Test 1 is essentially a limit dictated by the
critical heat flux for ignition, where the heat flux from the
flame is insufficient to sustain the burning. The similarity
between the upward flammability limit and the lines of constant opposed flow flame spread rate can then be directly
related. As was shown in (ref. 24), the limiting opposed flow
flame spread velocity is directly related to the critical heat flux
for ignition. Therefore, one of the lines of constant opposed
flow flame spread rate will be the limiting spread rate, which
is also the line of constant critical heat flux for ignition. This
line would then correspond to the upward flammability limit
of Test 1. If this hypothesis is verified by further experiments
and analysis, it could help to understand the flammability
limits derived from Test 1.

Conclusions
Microgravity tests of flammability and flame spread were
performed in a low-speed flow tunnel mounted on a 5.18 sec
NASA drop vehicle. Three thin fuels were tested for flammability (Ultem 1000, 10 mil film, Nomex HT90-40, and Mylar

NASA/TM—2008-215260

7

14. Olson, S.L., Ferkul, P.V., and T'ien, J.S., “Near-Limit Flame
Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel in Microgravity,” 22nd Symposium (International) on Combustion,” The Combustion Institute,
pp. 1213–1222, 1988.
15. Olson, S.L., “The Effect of Microgravity on Flame Spread Over
a Thin Fuel,” NASA TM–100195, 1987.
16. Ferkul, P.F., “An Experimental Study of Opposed Flow Diffusion Flame Extinction Over a Thin Fuel in Microgravity,”
NASA CR–182185, Feb. 1989.
17. Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R.A., Sacksteder, K., J. Heat
Transfer, 118, pp. 181–190, (1996).
18. Ferkul, P.V., “A Model of Concurrent Flow Flame Spread Over
a Thin Solid Fuel,” NASA CR–191111, 1993.
19. Grayson, G., Sacksteder, K.R., Ferkul, P.V., T'ien, J.S., Microgravity Science and Technology, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 187–195,
1994.
20. Pettegrew, R.D., “An Experimental Study of Ignition Effects
and Flame Growth over a Thin Solid Fuel in Low-Speed Concurrent Flow Using Drop-Tower Facilities,” NASA CR–198537,
Oct. 1996.
21. Di Blasi, C., Fire Mater. vol. 22, pp. 95–101, 1998.
22. Kleinhenz, J.E., “Flammability and Flame Spread of Nomex and
Cellulose in Space Habitat Environments,” Ph.D. Dissertation,
CWRU, May 2006.
23. Feier, I.I., Kleinhenz, J., T’ien, J.S., Ferkul, P.V., and
Sacksteder, K. “Pressure Modeling of Upward Flame Spread
Rates in Partial Gravity,” 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 2005.
24. Olson, S.L., Miller, F.J., and Wichman, I.S., “Characterizing
Fingering Flamelets Using the Logistic Model,” Combustion
Theory and Modelling, vol. 10, no.2, pp. 323–347, 2006.

function of pressure and oxygen. The lines of constant opposed flow agreed best with the 1g MOC trends, which can be
explained if the upward flammability limit derived from Test 1
is essentially a limit dictated by the critical heat flux for
ignition, where the heat flux from the flame is insufficient to
sustain the burning. Further evaluation of these and other
materials is continuing to better understand the 0g flammability of materials and its effect on the oxygen margin of safety.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Campbell, P.D., “Recommendations for Exploration spacecraft
Internal Atmospheres: The Final Report of the NASA Exploration Atmospheres Working Group,” JSC–63309, (January
2006).
Lewis, J.F, Barido, R.A, and Tuan, G. “Crew Exploration
Vehicle Environmental Control and Life Support Fire Protection
Approach,” International Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE 2007–01–3255, July 2007.
“Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in Environments that
Support Combustion,” NASA STD 6001, Test 1, Upward Flame
Propagation, (formerly NHB 8060.1C), February 9, 1998.
Hirsch, D.B, and Beeson, H.D., “Improved Test method to
Determine Flammability of Aerospace Materials,” Halon Options Technical Working Conference, April 2001.
Hirsch, D.B., and Beeson, H.D. “Test Method to Determine
Flammability of Aerospace Materials,” Journal of Testing and
Evaluation, vol. 30, issue 2, (4 pages), March 2002.
Hirsch, D.B, Williams, J.H, Harper, S.A., Beeson, H., and
Pedley, M.D.; “Oxygen Concentration Flammability Thresholds
of Selected Aerospace Materials considered for the Constellation Program,” Second IAASS Conference: Space Safety in a
Global World, Chicago, IL, May 2007.
Hirsch, D.B, Williams, J., and Beeson, H.; “Pressure Effects on
Oxygen Concentration Flammability Thresholds of Polymeric
Materials for Aerospace Applications,” Journal of Testing and
Evaluation, vol. 36, issue 1, pp. 69–72. NASA Document ID
20070018178, 2008.
Hirsch, D.B., NASA-WSTF, personal communication.
Olson, S.L., Combustion Science and Technology, vol. 76 nos.
4-6, pp. 233–249, 1991.
Klimek, R. and Wright, T., Spotlight image analysis software,
http://microgravity.grc.nasa.gov/spotlight/, 2005.
Sauers, D.G.; “The Effects of Forced Air Flow and Oxygen
Concentration on Flammability, Smoke Density, and Pyrolytic
Toxicity,” J. Fire Flammability, vol. 7, pp. 181–199, 1976.
Olson, S.L, and Miller, F.J. “Experimental Comparison of
Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread in a Forced Convective
Microgravity Environment,” submitted to the Proc. Comb. Inst
32, 2008.
Magee, R.S. and McAlevy III, R.F., J. Fire & Flammability, vol.
2, pp. 271–297, 1971.

NASA/TM—2008-215260

Nomenclature
1g
0g
CEV
CxP
EVA
ISS
LOI
M&P
MOC
NASA
PEI
ULOI
WSTF
ΔO2%0g–1g

8

normal gravity
microgravity
Crew Exploration Vehicle
Constellation Program
Extra Vehicular Activity
International Space Station
limiting oxygen index (downward or opposed)
NASA Materials and Processes
maximum oxygen concentration at extinction
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
polyetherimide
upward limiting oxygen index (burning)
White Sands Test Facility
the difference between the 0g mean flammability limit and the 1g mean flammability limit,
see eq. (1).

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB
control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)

2. REPORT TYPE

01-08-2008

Technical Memorandum

3. DATES COVERED (From - To)
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

Microgravity Flame Spread in Exploration Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen, and Velocity
Effects on Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread

5b. GRANT NUMBER
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
5d. PROJECT NUMBER

6. AUTHOR(S)

Olson, Sandra, L.; Ruff, Gary, A.; Miller, Fletcher, J.
5e. TASK NUMBER
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

WBS 344397.04.01.03
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field
Cleveland, Ohio 44135-3191

E-16527

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

10. SPONSORING/MONITORS
ACRONYM(S)

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20546-0001

NASA
11. SPONSORING/MONITORING
REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2008-215260; 2008-01-2005
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Unclassified-Unlimited
Subject Categories: 27, 54, 16 and 34
Available electronically at http://gltrs.grc.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 301-621-0390
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

14. ABSTRACT

Microgravity tests of flammability and flame spread were performed in a low-speed flow tunnel to simulate spacecraft ventilation flows.
Three thin fuels were tested for flammability (Ultem 1000 (General Electric Company), 10 mil film, Nomex (Dupont) HT90-40, and Mylar
G (Dupont) and one fuel for flame spread testing (Kimwipes (Kimberly-Clark Worldwide, Inc.). The 1g Upward Limiting Oxygen Index
(ULOI) and 1g Maximum Oxygen Concentration (MOC) are found to be greater than those in 0g, by up to 4% oxygen mole fraction,
meaning that the fuels burned in 0g at lower oxygen concentrations than they did using the NASA Standard 6001 Test 1 protocol. Flame
spread tests with Kimwipes were used to develop correlations that capture the effects of flow velocity, oxygen concentration, and pressure
on flame spread rate. These correlations were used to determine that over virtually the entire range of spacecraft atmospheres and flow
conditions, the opposed spread is faster, especially for normoxic atmospheres. The correlations were also compared with 1g MOC for
various materials as a function of pressure and oxygen. The lines of constant opposed flow agreed best with the 1g MOC trends, which
indicates that Test 1 limits are essentially dictated by the critical heat flux for ignition. Further evaluation of these and other materials is
continuing to better understand the 0g flammability of materials and its effect on the oxygen margin of safety.
15. SUBJECT TERMS

Flame; Oxygen; Pressure; Microgravity
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:
a. REPORT

b. ABSTRACT

U

U

17. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT
c. THIS
PAGE

U

UU

18. NUMBER
OF
PAGES

14

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

STI Help Desk (email:help@sti.nasa.gov)
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code)

301-621-0390
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18

