Acronym: SPICE
Title: Smoke Point In Co-flow Experiment

Principal Investigator(s):
David L. Urban, Ph.D., Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
Co-Investigator(s)\Collaborator(s):
Peter B. Sunderland, Ph.D., University of Maryland, College Park, MD
Zeng-guang Yuan, Ph. D. National Center for Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, OH
Contact(s):
PI - David Urban, (216) 433-2835
Primary - Frank Vergilii, (216) 433-6733
Mailing Address(es):
Dr. David L. Urban
NASA Glenn Research Center
MS 77-7
Cleveland, OH 44135
Dr. Peter B. Sunderland
Department of Fire Protection Engineering
University of Maryland
0151 Glenn L. Martin Hall
College Park, MD 20742
Dr. Zeng-Guang Yuan
NASA Glenn Research Center
MS 110-3
Cleveland, OH 44135
Developer(s): Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
ZIN Technologies, Cleveland, OH
Sponsoring Agency: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Increment(s) Assigned: 18, 19, 20
Brief Research Summary (PAO): The Smoke Point In Co-flow Experiment (SPICE) determines the point
at which gas-jet flames (similar to a butane-lighter flame) begin to emit soot (dark carbonaceous
particulate formed inside the flame) in microgravity. Studying a soot emitting flame is important in
understanding the ability of fires to spread and in control of soot in practical combustion systems space.
Research Summary:
•

Previous experiments show that soot dominates the heat emitted from flames in normal gravity
and microgravity fires. Control of this heat emission is critical for prevention of the spread of fires
on Earth and in space for the design of efficient combustion systems (jet engines and power
generation boilers).

•

The onset of soot emission from small gas jet flames (similar to a butane-lighter flame) will be
studied to provide a database that can be used to assess the interaction between fuel chemistry
and flow conditions on soot formation. These results will be used to support combustion theories
and to assess fire behavior in microgravity.

•

The Smoke Point In Co-flow Experiment (SPICE) will lead to a
o improved design of practical combustors through improved control of soot formation;
o improved understanding of and ability to predict heat release, soot production and
emission in microgravity fires;
o improved flammability criteria for selection of materials for use in the next generation of
spacecraft.

Detailed Research Description: The Smoke Point In Co-flow Experiment (SPICE) will continue the
study of fundamental phenomena related to understanding the mechanisms controlling the stability and
extinction of jet diffusion flames begun with the Laminar Soot Processes (LSP) on STS-94. SPICE will
stabilize an enclosed laminar flame in a co-flowing oxidizer, measure the overall flame shape to validate
the theoretical and numerical predictions, measure the flame stabilization heights, and measure the
temperature field to verify flame structure predictions.
SPICE will determine the laminar smoke point properties of non-buoyant jet diffusion flames (i.e., the
properties of the largest laminar jet diffusion flames that do not emit soot) for several fuels under different
nozzle diameter/co-flow velocity configurations. Luminous flame shape measurements would also be
made to verify models of the flame shapes under co-flow conditions. The smoke point is a simple
measurement that has been found useful to study the influence of flow and fuel properties on the sooting
propensity of flames. This information would help support current understanding of soot processes in
laminar flames and by analogy in turbulent flames of practical interest.
Project Type: Payload
Images and Captions:

Top: Onset of the closed-tip smoke point for flames in quiescent ambient from the LSP experiment.
Bottom: Onset of the open-tip smoke point for flames in quiescent ambient from the LSP experiment on
STS-94. Similar behaviors are expected with SPICE. Images courtesy of Glenn Research Center,
Cleveland, OH.

SPICE Hardware inside of the Microgravity Science Glovebox at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC).
Image courtesy of Glenn Research Center.

NASA Image: ISS018E026974 Astronaut Sandra Magnus works with the Smoke Point In Co-flow
Experiment (SPICE) in the Microgravity Sciences Glovebox (MSG) during Expedition 18.

Operations Location: ISS Inflight
Brief Research Operations:
•

The crewmember will unstow and assemble the SPICE hardware on the base plate within the
Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) working volume and connect electrical and data harnesses.

•

During course of experiment, the crew will install and exchange fuel bottles, exchange burner
tubes, control fuel flow and flame ignition.

•

For each test point the crew will set the burner diameter and air flow before ignition. After ignition,
the crew will adjust the fuel flow rate until the flame is at the smoke point.

•

The crew will control video and still camera functions, some photos are down-linked for near-real
time coordination with the investigator. The crewmember will uninstall experiment from the MSG
and stow the hardware once SPICE is completed.

Operational Requirements: SPICE will be conducted inside the sealed MSG work volume. The
crewmember is involved throughout the experiment to load fuel bottles, initiate tests, ignite the fuel, adjust
flame to smoke point, monitor and record data, exchange burner tubes, exchange fuel bottles and replace
the igniter. Six test sequences covering six different fuels with three different burner tubes, for a total of
fifty-four (54) test points will be performed by the crewmember. Periodic repeat points are desired if time
is available. Data will be downlinked via video during or immediately after each flame test. Digital photos
are downlinked after selected flame tests for ground confirmation before proceeding. SPICE testing
session must be conducted during periods when no major reboost or docking procedures are underway
on the International Space Station.
Operational Protocols: The crewmember installs the SPICE hardware in the MSG work volume. The
SPICE hardware consists of a small flow duct with an igniter and a small nozzle. Outside the flow duct are
2 cameras, the fuel supply bottle and various electronic boxes. Each test is conducted by the
crewmember who installs the correct diameter nozzle and sets the air flow rate through the duct before
igniting the flame. When the flame is ignited, (it will look similar to a butane-lighter flame) the crewmember
adjusts the flame size (by controlling the fuel flow rate) until the flame is just at the smoke point (the size
where the flame just begins to emit a small stream of soot from the tip). After triggering the high resolution
camera, the crewmember turns off the fuel and prepares for the next test. The science team on the
ground will monitor the video downlink to assist the crewmember in determining the smoke point and will
review the sensor data overlaid on the video image. Between test sessions the crew will change the fuel
bottle to a different fuel (six will be tested). Upon completion of the tests the crewmember stows the
hardware and the stored images and data are returned to Earth for analysis.
Review Cycle Status: PI Reviewed
Category: Physical Sciences in Microgravity
Sub-Category: Combustion Science
Space Applications: Current NASA spacecraft materials selection is based upon a simplified test
method that segregates material based upon behavior on Earth without real consideration of microgravity
effects. A critical element of this understanding is the radiative heat emission from the flame. This heat
emission is strongly influenced by the extent of soot formation. Improved understanding of soot formation
and thereby the heat release from microgravity fires will allow more complete and effective utilization of
the flammability test results. These results can be used in first-order models and predictions of heat

release in spacecraft fires and as a means to extend heat release data from tests like the NASA conecalorimeter test to microgravity fires to a performance based material selection process.
Earth Applications: The smoke-point phenomena is a classical metric in the understanding of the heat
release and spread rate of fires. It is commonly used in fire modeling on Earth and to understand the soot
growth and emission by flames. The dominant characteristics of many flames of practical interest are
nonbuoyant. The LSP experiment has shown that the onset of the microgravity smoke point in a
quiescent environment is very different from that seen in normal gravity. SPICE seeks to extend our
understanding by looking at the interaction of ambient flow with the smoke point, enabling us to better
predict heat release from non-buoyant flames in practical combustors (e.g. jet engines and furnaces).
Manifest Status: Continuing
Supporting Organization: Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD)
Previous Missions: This is a new investigation for research on the ISS.
Web Sites:
SPICE
Related Payload(s): SAME
Last Update: 02/17/2009

