• Power-control circuits for ultracapacitors can be simpler than those for batteries.
• Whereas a typical battery can be
charged and discharged about 300
times, an ultracapacitor can be
charged and discharged more than a
million times.
• The longer lifetimes of ultracapacitors
greatly reduce life-of-system costs and
reduce adverse environmental effects,
inasmuch as it will probably never be
necessary to replace and dispose of ultracapacitors in most applications,
whereas batteries must be replaced frequently.
• Disposal problems and the associated
contributions to life-of-system costs are
further reduced because the chemical
constituents of ultracapacitors are less
toxic and less environmentally harmful
than are those of batteries.
• Excellent low-temperature performance makes ultracapacitors suitable for
storing energy in applications at temperatures too low for batteries.
• The consistent performance of ultracapacitors over time enables reliable
operation not possible with batteries.
• Unlike batteries, ultracapacitors can
be safely left completely discharged for
indefinitely long times.

• Whereas the charge-discharge efficiency in conventional power management using rechargeable batteries is
typically about 50 percent, the chargedischarge efficiency in HPM typically
exceeds 90 percent.
Figure 2 depicts the relationships
among the various subsystems of the
HPM system for the present fuel-cellpowered utility vehicle. At the beginning of operation, the PEM fuel cells
are started and used to charge the ultracapacitors. As operation continues, the
fuel cells continue to recharge the ultracapacitors while electric energy is
drawn from the ultracapacitors (just as
energy is drawn from a rechargeable
battery in a conventional hybrid vehicle) to drive an electric traction motor
that propels the vehicle. In a conceptual alternative version of the vehicle,
photovoltaic cells would be used (in addition to or instead of fuel cells) to
charge the ultracapacitors. In another
conceptual version, some additional
recharging would be gained by use of
regenerative braking.
Large transient loads are imposed
on the traction motor of this or any
electric vehicle. Large transient loads
shorten the operational lifetimes of
PEM fuel cells. By smoothing out the

transient loads applied to the PEM fuel
cells, the energy-storage devices (in
this case, the ultracapacitors) increase
the operational lifetimes of the fuel
cells and make it possible to utilize
fuel cells smaller than would be necessary if the fuel cells alone were required to satisfy the peak power demand. An optimized combination of
PEM fuel cells and ultracapacitors
makes it possible to obtain high energy
and power densities.
The storage of the hydrogen fuel in
the form of a metal hydride is a major
feature of the design of this system, intended to overcome the disadvantages
of the prior approaches to storing hydrogen as a compressed gas at room
temperature or as a cryogenic liquid.
Storage in a metal hydride can be accomplished more safely and efficiently,
at relatively low pressure, without refrigeration.
This work was done by Dennis J. Eichenberg
of Glenn Research Center. Further information is contained in a TSP (see page 1).
Inquiries concerning rights for the commercial use of this invention should be addressed
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail
Stop 4–8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland,
Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-18281-1.

Fine-Water-Mist Multiple-Orientation-Discharge Fire Extinguisher
Rechargeable system discharges 100 percent of its contents regardless of extinguisher orientation.
John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
A fine-water-mist fire-suppression device has been designed so that it can be
discharged uniformly in any orientation
via a high-pressure gas propellant. Standard fire extinguishers used while
slightly tilted or on their side will not discharge all of their contents. Thanks to
the new design, this extinguisher can be
used in multiple environments such as
aboard low-gravity spacecraft, airplanes,
and aboard vehicles that may become
overturned prior to or during a fire
emergency. Research in recent years has
shown that fine water mist can be an effective alternative to Halons now
banned from manufacture.
Currently, NASA uses carbon dioxide
for fire suppression on the International Space Station (ISS) and Halon
chemical extinguishers on the space
shuttle. While each of these agents is effective, they have drawbacks. The toxicity of carbon dioxide requires that the

24

crew don breathing apparatus when the
extinguishers are deployed on the ISS,
and Halon use in future spacecraft has
been eliminated because of international protocols on substances that destroy atmospheric ozone. A major advantage to the new system on occupied
spacecraft is that the discharged system
is locally rechargeable. Since the only
fluids used are water and nitrogen, the
system can be recharged from stores of
both carried aboard the ISS or spacecraft. The only support requirement
would be a pump to fill the water and a
compressor to pressurize the nitrogen
propellant gas. This system uses a
gaseous agent to pressurize the storage
container as well as to assist in the generation of the fine water mist.
The portable fire extinguisher hardware works like a standard fire extinguisher with a single storage container
for the agents (water and nitrogen), a

control valve assembly for manual actuation, and a discharge nozzle. The design
implemented in the proof-of-concept
experiment successfully extinguished
both open fires and fires in baffled enclosures.
The proof-of-concept design weighs less
than 20 lb (9 kg) and can be easily scaled
up or down in size depending on the application. The design is fully self-contained
and modular with no complex piping to
thread through a crowded habitation
module, and mounting is simplified.
The liquid agent is water, or water
with additives to enhance the fire suppression capability for specific fire hazards. Compatible gases include nitrogen, argon, or other common
nonflammable gases. Each fluid constituent is held in the container by a
valve. Design features inside the storage
tank make it possible to easily discharge
all of the fluid as a uniformly dispersed

NASA Tech Briefs, January 2010

fine water mist regardless of gravity or
system orientation.
When the system is operated, the gas
pressure forces the liquid from the extinguisher. The gas and liquid constituents are also mixed to deliver a multiphase flow to the discharge nozzle to

generate fine water-mist droplets, which
extinguish the fire.
This work was done by James R. Butz,
Craig S. Turchi, and Amanda Kimball of
ADA Technologies Inc. and Thomas McKinnon and Edward Riedel of Colorado School of
Mines for Glenn Research Center.

Inquiries concerning rights for the commercial use of this invention should be addressed
to ADA Technologies Inc, Attn: Nick Knowlton, 8100 Shaffer Pkwy, suite 130, Littleton,
CO. 80127-4107, (303) 874-7377. LEW18190-1

Fuel-Cell Water Separator
Separator uses no moving parts or other power-consuming components.
John H. Glenn Research Center, Ohio
The main product of a typical fuel cell
is water, and many fuel-cell configurations use the flow of excess gases (i.e.,
gases not consumed by the reaction) to
drive the resultant water out of the cell.
This two-phase mixture then exits
through an exhaust port where the two
fluids must again be separated to prevent the fuel cell from flooding and to
facilitate the reutilization of both fluids.
The Glenn Research Center (GRC) has
designed, built, and tested an innovative
fuel-cell water separator that not only removes liquid water from a fuel cell’s exhaust ports, but does so with no moving
parts or other power-consuming components. Instead it employs the potential and
kinetic energies already present in the
moving exhaust flow. In addition, the

NASA Tech Briefs, January 2010

geometry of the separator is explicitly intended to be integrated into a fuel-cell
stack, providing a direct mate with the fuel
cell’s existing flow ports. The separator is
also fully scalable, allowing it to accommodate a wide range of water removal requirements. Multiple separators can simply be
“stacked” in series or parallel to adapt to
the water production/removal rate.
GRC’s separator accomplishes the task
of water removal by coupling a high aspect-ratio flow chamber with a highly hydrophilic, polyethersulfone membrane.
The hydrophilic membrane readily absorbs and transports the liquid water away
from the mixture while simultaneously resisting gas penetration. The expansive flow
path maximizes the interaction of the
water particles with the membrane while

minimizing the overall gas flow restriction.
In essence, each fluid takes its corresponding path of least resistance, and the two
fluids are effectively separated.
The GRC fuel-cell water separator has
a broad range of applications, including
commercial hydrogen-air fuel cells currently being considered for power generation in automobiles.
This work was done by Kenneth Alan Burke,
Caleb Fisher, and Paul Newman of Glenn Research Center. Further information is contained in a TSP (see page 1).
Inquiries concerning rights for the commercial use of this invention should be addressed
to NASA Glenn Research Center, Innovative
Partnerships Office, Attn: Steve Fedor, Mail
Stop 4–8, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, Ohio 44135. Refer to LEW-18304-1.

25

