Benefits of a Single-Person Spacecraft for Weightless Operations
Brand Norman Griffin
Gray Research, Jacobs Engineering ESTS Group, Huntsville, Alabama, 35806; Ph
(256) 544-2427; email: brand.n.griffin@nasa.gov

ABSTRACT
Historically, less than 20 percent of crew time related to extravehicular activity
(EVA) is spent on productive external work. For planetary operations space suits are still the
logical choice; however for safe and rapid access to the weightless environment, spacecraft
offer compelling advantages. FlexCraft, a concept for a single-person spacecraft, enables
any-time access to space for short or long excursions by different astronauts. For the
International Space Station (ISS), going outside is time-consuming, requiring pre-breathing,
donning a fitted space suit, and pumping down an airlock. For each ISS EVA this is between
12.5 and 16 hours. FlexCraft provides immediate access to space because it operates with the
same cabin atmosphere as its host. Furthermore, compared to the space suit pure oxygen
environment, a mixed gas atmosphere lowers the fire risk and allows use of conventional
materials and systems. For getting to the worksite, integral propulsion replaces hand-overhand translation or having another crew member operate the robotic arm. This means less
physical exertion and more time at the work site. Possibly more important, in case of an
emergency, FlexCraft can return from the most distant point on ISS in less than a minute.
The one-size-fits-all FlexCraft means no on-orbit inventory of parts or crew time required to
fit all astronauts. With a shirtsleeve cockpit, conventional displays and controls are used,
there is no suit trauma and because the work is not strenuous, no rest days are required.
Furthermore, there is no need to collect hand tools because manipulators are equipped with
force multiplying end-effectors that can deliver the precise torque for the job. FlexCraft is an
efficient solution for asteroid exploration allowing all crew to use one vehicle with no risk of
contamination. And, because FlexCraft is a vehicle, its design offers better radiation and
micro-meteoroid protection than space suits.

