Paper # 000

Topic: Fire

8th U. S. National Combustion Meeting
Organized by the Western States Section of the Combustion Institute
and hosted by the University of Utah
May 19-22, 2013
Quantitative Infrared Image Analysis
Of Simultaneous Upstream and Downstream Microgravity Flame Spread over Thermally-Thin
Cellulose in Low Speed Forced Flow
S.L. Olson1, J. R. Lee2, O. Fujita3, M. Kikuchi4, and T. Kashiwagi5
1

NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
2
QinetiQ North America, Cleveland, OH
3
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
4
JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan
5
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD
The effect of low velocity forced flow on microgravity flame spread is examined using
quantitative analysis of infrared video imaging. The objective of the quantitative analysis is
to provide insight into the mechanisms of flame spread in microgravity where the flame is
able to spread from a central location on the fuel surface, rather than from an edge. Surface
view calibrated infrared images of ignition and flame spread over a thin cellulose fuel were
obtained along with a color video of the surface view and color images of the edge view
using 35 mm color film at 2 Hz. The cellulose fuel samples were mounted in the center of a
12 cm wide by 16 cm tall flow duct and were ignited in microgravity using a straight hot
wire across the center of the 7.5 cm wide by 14 cm long samples. Four cases, at 1 atm.
35%O2 in N2, at forced flows from 2 cm/s to 20 cm/s are presented here. This flow range
captures flame spread from strictly upstream spread at low flows, to predominantly
downstream spread at high flow. Surface temperature profiles are evaluated as a function
of time, and temperature gradients for upstream and downstream flame spread are
measured. Flame spread rates from IR image data are compared to visible image spread
rate data. IR blackbody temperatures are compared to surface thermocouple readings to
evaluate the effective emissivity of the pyrolyzing surface. Preheat lengths and pyrolysis
lengths are evaluated both upstream and downstream of the central ignition point. A
surface energy balance estimates the net heat flux from the flame to the fuel surface along
the length of the fuel. Surface radiative loss and gas-phase radiation from soot are
measured relative to the net heat feedback from the flame. At high surface heat loss
relative to heat feedback, the downstream flame spread does not occur.

1

Corresponding Author: Sandra L. Olson, NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd. m.s. 77-5, Cleveland,
OH 44135. Phone (216) 433-2859, Fax (216) 433-8050, email Sandra.L.Olson@NASA.gov

1. Introduction
Microgravity flame spread over thin solid fuels has been a subject of considerable research over
the past 30 years, and there have been significant advances in our understanding of the mechanisms
of flame spread in microgravity [Ross (2001), Fernandez-Pello]. Notably, the roles of solid-phase
radiative loss [T’ien] and oxygen transport [Olson (1991)] on the microgravity extinction limits of
solid fuels have been well established. Quantitative analysis of surface temperature profiles and net
heat flux from the flame to the fuel has been challenging even in normal gravity experiments
[Hirano& Sato, Quintiere]. Researchers have used thermocouples [Hirano et al., Cordova et al.] or
holographic interferometry [Ito& Kashiwagi] in normal gravity, but only a few microgravity tests
have attempted to measure surface temperatures or heat flux [Bhattacharjee et al., Olson et al.
(2001), Olson et al (2004)]. Numerical models have been used to predict the net heat flux from the
flame to the solid fuel [Ferkul & T’ien, Di Blasi, Prasad et al., Nakamura et al., Kumar et al.].
There have been limited studies using infrared cameras in microgravity [Sanchez-Tarifa &
Lazaro, Ross & Miller, Feier et al., Kleinhenz et al.], most of which were of limited quantitative
utility because of the early IR camera’s 8 bit dynamic range. However, more advanced cameras
have increased the bit depth, which improves the dynamic range enough to make the cameras useful
for imaging surface heat up and pyrolysis during combustion experiments. In this work we present
surface IR image results from microgravity combustion of cellulose fuels in different oxygen and
flow environments. A previous paper [Prasad et al.] reported on visible flame spread results and
compared the results to model predictions. The infrared surface temperature data reported here can
provide added depth to the model comparisons.

2. Experimental Method
The experimental hardware, shown conceptually
in Figure 1, is described in [Prasad et al.], and
consisted of a flow duct inside a sealed chamber
which was filled with 21%, 35%, or 50% oxygen
in nitrogen at 1 atmosphere pressure. The flow
duct provided a uniform flow of 2-20 cm/s past
the fuel sample. The fuel samples were 60
mg/cm2 cellulose 7.5 cm wide and 14 cm long.
Figure 1: Conceptual schematic of experiment.
They were ignited with a straight hot wire across
Edge view image of the sample and flame in the
the center of the sample (7 cm of fuel upstream
and downstream of the igniter) starting at time=0s flow duct. The central igniter is represented by the
yellow dot. Two surface view cameras are shown.
(represented by the yellow dot in Figure 1). The
flame was established by 2 seconds, so the data
analysis begins at 2 seconds. At the end of the
microgravity time, a solenoid valve opens and CO2is blown into the duct to extinguish the flame.
The infrared camera used in the tests was a 12 bit FLIR Systems, Inc. Prism DS™ with a 50 mm
lens. A 200 nm bandwidth ‘flame filter’ centered at 3.8 μm was used to remove most of the gasphase radiation from CO2 and H2O. The surface temperature calibration was performed with a

2

calibrated Micron™ black body over the
camera’s operating range of 150oC to
770oC including the optical path elements
(lens, calcium fluoride window, zinc sulfide
window, 2 mirrors). A 10 pixel diameter
area of the image was averaged to obtain
the black body temperature to pixel level
calibration. The accuracy of the black body
surface temperatures is ±20oC, and the
spatial resolution was 0.3 mm per pixel.
The IR camera image was 244 x 320 pixels,
and the field of view was 7.5 cm wide by
10 cm long. The infrared images were
analyzed using Tracer™ and Thermacam
Researcher™ software. 2

2 cm/s

5 cm/s

A 35 mm color film camera was used to
image the edge view of the flame during
the test at ~ 2 frames per second, and a
front view standard color video camera was
used to image the surface view of the flame
and fuel burning during the test. Type K
thermocouples (0.005 cm diameter bare
wire) were sewn into each sample to record
the surface temperatures. The surface
temperatures are used to compare to the
black body temperature readings in order to
get information on the fuel emissivity as it
heats up and begins to pyrolyze. The
surface thermocouple beads were located
along the sample centerline at upstream
locations +4 cm, +2 cm, 0 cm, and
downstream -2 cm, all relative to the igniter
location.

10 cm/s

20 cm/s

3. Results
3.1 Flame Images
Four tests at 35% oxygen molar percent at
2, 5, 10, and 20 cm/s forced flow velocities
are shown in Figure 2. The edge view and
surface view visible color images are

Figure 2: Visible edge view and front view images and IR
front view images of the flame at the end of the drop. Times
are not exact due to different framing rates. Flow velocities
are as indicated. Flow is from bottom to top. IR view is
mirror image of visible camera view.

2

™ Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States
Government or any agency thereof or its contractors or subcontractors.

3

shown along with the surface infrared image, which has a smaller field of view than the color image.
These images are all from the end of the drop test, although the timing is not exact due to different
framing rates of the cameras. The printed grid on the sample is 1 cm square. It appears lighter in
the infrared because its emissivity is higher than the pristine cellulose fuel. There is a horizontal
igniter wire in the front view images. Red LEDs used to illuminate the sample are visible in the
edge views. Very thin thermocouple wires are also present, and visible in some IR images. The
flame spread is reasonably two dimensional since the sample is wide enough and the ignition is
uniform across the fuel width. The IR color temperature legend is also shown.
The side view color images show the flame transitioning from a strictly upstream flame spread (2
cm/s) to two completely separate flames (20 cm/s). The sooting increases as the flow increases, and
the flame standoff decreases with increasing flow. At 10 cm/s, a luminous upstream flame is visible
in the edge view. This luminous flame fades as it extends downstream, and a kink in the flame
shape is observed in the edge view near the location of the downstream fuel burnout edge. The outer
blue halo flame fades before the kink, but there is a very faint blue inner flame visible in the left
edge view flame that appears to be the beginning of a flame base attaching to the upstream edge of
the downstream flame. The rest of the flame above the downstream side of the fuel has a large
standoff distance and appears to still be an extension of the upstream flame. This is in contrast to
the downstream flame fully separated from an upstream flame observed at 20 cm/s flow.
The surface color view images show that while the upstream leading edge of the flame is 2D, there
are 3D soot structures occurring in the flame. At 2 cm/s, the sooting along the edges of the fuel is
most pronounced. The downstream pyrolysis front is very flat. At 5 cm/s the sooting extends
downstream over the downstream fuel, but in a pinched off funnel shape. The downstream burnout
is fairly flat, and the pyrolysis front is also flat. This funnel is still present at 10 cm/s but appears to
be longer. The downstream burnout is farther from the igniter wire. At 20 cm/s, the upstream flame
has 3 soot lobes at the leading edge, with a large gap between the upstream burnout and downstream
burnout. The downstream flame begins to show some independent sooting.
The IR images show the fairly 2D thermal structure of the pyrolizing fuel surface even up to 10
cm/s. Exothermic char oxidation that is a clear indication of a downstream flame base is clearly
present in the 20 cm/s image, and is beginning to show at 10 cm/s with a slight saturated glow at the
burnout. At 2 cm/s and 5 cm/s the only downstream exothermic char oxidation is at the fuel edges.
It may be that the flame there would continue to spread given longer times and larger separation
from the upstream flame. The fuel cracking late in the test does disrupt the symmetry of the fuel,
and fuel distortion disturbs the flow somewhat. The gas-phase sooting increases in intensity in the
burnout gap as flow increases. It is very strong in the upstream 20 cm/s flame.
Figure 3 shows the surface view of the initial sample (Fig. 3a), and the burned samples after the
flame is extinguished (Figs.3b-3e) for each flow case. The infrared camera field of view is less than
the total sample length, as shown in Figure 3a. Some of the pyrolyzed fuel has been blown away
during the CO2 suppression at the end of the microgravity time. As can be seen the upstream flames
(bottom of the images) have propagated nearly to the edge of the fuel by the 20 cm/s case. The
downstream fuel is also fully charred for 20 cm/s. However, at 2, 5, and even 10 cm/s much of the
downstream fuel remains.

4

IR Field of
View

a) Unburned
b) 2 cm/s
c) 5 cm/s
d) 10 cm/s
e) 20 cm/s
Figure 3: a) Initial sample size showing IR field of view and b)-e) Post-test sample images showing char
patterns. The samples were extinguished on impact using a CO2 jet into the chamber, so these char patterns
reflect the 0g burn extent. Flow is from bottom to top in these images. As flow increases, the extent of char
increases in both directions, but it increases more so for the downstream flame.

3.2 Blackbody Temperature Profiles
Blackbody surface temperature line profiles near the centerline down the length of the sample were
taken every 0.5 second to study the transient surface temperature data. Figure 4 shows these line
profiles from each case. The igniter location is at 0 cm. Upstream of the igniter (opposed flow
flame region) is positive x, and downstream of the igniter (concurrent flow flame region) is negative
x. The shaded box from 500K to 600K indicates where the temperature gradient (dT/dx) data was
evaluated. This temperature range was selected to capture the preheating below the pyrolysis
temperature. For example, notice in Figure 3c, the fuel pyrolysis extends downstream to about -3
cm. In Figure 4b, the temperature at -30 mm just reached 600K. The visible image in Fig. 3c
reveals that the sample is darkened downstream of 30 mm, but not to the point where the printed grid
is no longer visible. Temperatures at the 5th grid line (-50 mm) did not exceed 500K even though the
sample continued to -70 mm (out of the IR field of view).
As seen in all four of the plots in Figure 4, there is a spike at x=0 corresponding to ignition.
The upstream flame becomes very steady as shown by the similarity in the temperature profiles at
different times. The surface temperature plateaus during pyrolysis at 650-700K. At 2 cm/s and 5
cm/s there is no peak for oxidative pyrolysis. Once burnout occurs, the surface temperatures drop,
but not back to the baseline reading due to gas- phase radiation. There is a general increase in the
gas-phase radiation with flow, due to increasing temperatures and soot (Figure 2).
Downstream profiles do not show the same steadiness. In Figure 4a and 4b, the profiles become
more closely spaced as time increases. In Figure 4c, the profiles begin to show a uniform shifting
later in the drop. Figure 4d shows a large fairly uniform spacing early, with the preheat region
quickly moving out of the field of view of the IR camera (by 5 sec). There are large spikes in
temperature at the flame base of the downstream flame in both Figure 4c for later profiles and more
extensively in Figure 4d, indicating exothermic char oxidation is occurring there.

5

3.3 Temperature Gradients
The surface temperature gradients (dT/dx) as a function of time extracted from this data is shown in
Figure 5. Error bars on the temperature gradient are estimated to be ±10% of the gradient, based
upon the 20oC accuracy of the camera and the 100oC range for the gradient evaluation. The
upstream temperature gradient reaches an approximately constant value after the ignition transient (~
4 s). At low flows, the value of the temperature gradient does not change, indicating that conduction
and diffusion are dominating the heat transfer and flame standoff distance. At higher flows, the
temperature gradient increases, indicating that convection dominates the heat transfer from the
flame.
The downstream temperature gradients are much lower, and only reach steady state levels of less
than 6 K/mm for the higher flows. The average post-ignition temperature gradients are plotted in
Figure 6. There is almost an order of magnitude difference between the upstream flame and the
downstream flame. The fuel beneath the upstream flame heats up quickly due to the intense heat
flux from the leading edge of the flame in contrast to the fuel beneath the downstream flame, which
has a much larger standoff distance.
a)

Downstream

Upstream

b) Downstream

c)

Downstream

Upstream

d) Downstream

Upstream

Upstream

Figure 4: Blackbody surface temperature line profiles as a function of time for 35% O2, 1
atmosphere tests: a) 2 cm/s, b) 5 cm/s, c)10 cm/s, d) 20 cm/s. Yellow shaded box gives temperature
range over which the temperature gradient was obtained.

6

Figure 5: Temperature gradients for both upstream and downstream directions as a function of
time during each microgravity drop with flow as indicated. a) upstream gradients, b) downstream
gradients.

3.4 Flame Spread
The surface temperature can also be used to
track the flame spread rate. To do this, we
chose a surface temperature of 600K as a
reasonable pyrolysis temperature. This
worked well for the upstream flame spread
and downstream flame pyrolysis tip spread,
but the downstream flame base spread
required a higher temperature (700K) to detect
the base (burnout) of the flame. Figure 7
shows the pyrolysis position versus time data
for each flow case for both the upstream and
downstream data.
Figure 6: Average post-ignition transient temperature
gradients for each flow condition. Downstream gradients

The upstream flame spread is steady for each are an order-of magnitude lower than upstream gradients,
due to the different flame structure for the two flames.
case, and linear fits to each position versus
time curve are shown. The downstream flames take longer to stabilize than the upstream flames,
and the downstream pyrolysis fronts (600K) spread rapidly as the flame grows from ignition.
The downstream flame base (700K isotherm) moves more slowly but steadily downstream for the
higher flow rates. At 2 cm/s the pyrolysis front (600K isotherm) spread stops and the sample
actually begins to cool as the upstream flame moves away. At 5 cm/s the pyrolysis front stops, but
just starts to cool at the end of the drop. At 10 cm/s, the pyrolysis front slows but does continue to
spread at approximately the same rate as the flame base (700K). The 20 cm/s case pyrolysis front
begins to slow down, but does not reach a steady state pyrolysis front before the 600K isotherm
moves outside of the IR camera field of view.
Flame spread rates derived from the slopes of the curve fits in Figure 7 are shown in Figure 8 as a
function of flow. The upstream or opposed flow flame spread rate, increases at low flow, but

7

Figure 7: Position of the upstream 600K and downstream 600K and 700K thermal waves as a
function of time. Downstream flames do not reach a steady length for the 20 cm/s flow case.
Linear fits (shown) provide the flame or pyrolysis front spread rates.
plateaus at higher flow as conditions
enter the thermal regime of flame
spread [Olson (1991)]. This is
consistent with previous research using
visible imaging at this elevated 35%
oxygen concentration [Prasad et al.].

The downstream spread of the flame
base is also shown in Figure 8. The
flame base spread rate increases
linearly with flow, which is also
consistent with prior research [Ferkul
& T’ien]. At low flow rates, the
downstream flame is not
simultaneously viable with the
upstream flame, due to oxygen
vitiation from the upstream flame,
despite significant heating and fuel
surface pyrolysis in over the first few
cm of the downstream sample.

Figure 8: Flame spread rates for simultaneous opposed
and concurrent spread as a function of the ambient flow.
The upstream spread is the leading edge spread rate, and
the downstream spread is the flame base spread rate. The
downstream flame is not simultaneously viable for the
the 2 cm/s and 5 cm/s flows.
8

3.5 Flame Preheat and Pyrolysis Lengths
The preheat lengths for the flames can be estimated by evaluating the length from ΔT=600K-300K
(ambient to pyrolysis temperatures), based upon the measured linear temperature gradients shown in
Figure 4 (i.e. 300K/(dT/dx)). For those downstream cases where flame base burnout was observed,
pyrolysis lengths can be measured directly by locating the x locations for isotherms for 700K and
600K and taking the Δx between them. For upstream pyrolysis lengths, the Δx between the rising
600 K isotherm (leading edge) and the decaying 600K isotherm (burnout) can be used, as shown in
Figure 4.The direct measurements are needed since the temperature gradients are not relevant in this
temperature range. The calculated preheat and pyrolysis lengths are shown in Figure 9 for each case.
In each case, the upstream flames have a very small but steady preheat on the order of 5 mm. The
upstream pyrolysis length grows with time for each case, never reaching steady state. However, the

a)

2 cm/s

b) 5 cm/s

c) 10 cm/s

d) 20 cm/s

Figure 9: Preheat and Pyrolysis Lengths for each test. The preheat lengths are taken from 300K-600K, and
pyrolysis lengths from 600K-700K. a) 2 cm/s; b) 5 cm/s; c) 10 cm/s; d)20 cm/s.
9

pyrolysis lengths are shorter at higher flow, as the fuel burns out sooner with the increased heat flux.
The downstream flame preheat length
rapidly grows early in the test as the flame
expands downstream. For the 2 cm/s and
5 cm/s cases, no steady preheat length is
seen since the flame base does not
propagate downstream in these cases and as
the temperature gradient decays, the
calculated preheat length continues to
increase.
For the 10 cm/s case, the downstream
flame does grow and reaches a steady
preheat length of ~46.5 mm until late in the
test when the 600K line approaches the
edge of the IR field of view. The
downstream burnout front (flame base) is
represented by a much higher temperature
(700K), so we also directly measure the
distance between 600K and 700K, which is Figure 10: Preheat and Pyrolysis Lengths as a function of
also shown in Figure 5, and reaches a
flow for both upstream and downstream flames, based on
steady length of ~35.5 mm later in the test. values from Figure 9.
To estimate the total preheat length from
ambient to burnout, we add the two pseudo-steady values to estimate a pseudo-steady preheat length
of ~84 mm for the downstream flame, which is longer than the actual downstream sample (70 mm),
so an actual steady-state concurrent flame size was not obtained for this test. This is not surprising,
since the downstream flame never full separated from the upstream flame.
For the 20 cm/s case, the downstream flame rapidly grows out of the IR field of view, so
measurements are not complete. The measured preheat length was 59.5 mm, and the measured
pyrolysis length was 38.3 mm, for a total length of 97.8 mm, much longer than the available sample.
Figure 10 has a summary of the measured flame lengths for the four cases. The upstream preheat
lengths shown a decrease with increasing flow as would be expected from α/U scaling. The upstream
pyrolysis lengths at the end of the test also exhibit a linear decrease with increasing flow. The end
of test downstream preheat lengths at the lower flows are ~ 5 cm and do not vary with flow within
the estimated error, but do show an increase for the 20 cm/s case. The downstream pyrolysis lengths
can only be measured for the highest two cases since only for those cases did the temperatures reach
700 K after the ignition transient. The pyrolysis length is shorter than the preheat length for the
downstream flame, in contrast with the upstream flame. The total downstream estimated flame
lengths (preheat + pyrolysis) are also shown, but are longer than the actual sample so direct
measures were not possible.

10

3.6 Thermocouple Readings
The thermocouple data for the surface thermocouples can be compared with the IR image results.
The thermocouple data for the four cases is shown in Figure 11. In Figures 11a and 11b the
upstream surface thermocouples at +2 cm and +4 cm are plotted for the four cases. In each test, the
thermocouple heats up sharply in a convex shape from ambient as the flame approaches. The shape
of the curve has an inflection point at the peak heat flux beneath the flame leading edge, and then the
curve plateaus at the fuel pyrolysis temperature. These plateau pyrolysis temperatures are plotted in
the inset as a function of flow. At the +2 cm location, the flame arrival time is nearly constant due to
the proximity of the igniter. Interestingly, the slowest flows respond first to the approach despite the
slower spread rate. This is attributed to the ~ 1.5x larger preheat distance at the slow flow compared
to the fastest flow. The pyrolysis temperatures increase linearly with flow. At the +4 cm location,
the difference in spread rates has allowed the faster flames to arrive earlier so the profiles stack with
the flow. The pyrolysis temperatures are nearly identical to the +2 cm temperatures, indicating the
upstream flame is steady.

Figure 11c shows the surface thermocouple data for -2cm for each of the four cases. The heat up
occurs almost from ignition as the heated gas flows downstream past the thermocouple. The shape
of the curve is nearly linear early on, and then plateaus out to pyrolysis temperatures. These are
again plotted in the inset. The downstream pyrolysis temperatures are non-linear with flow, and
lower than the upstream temperatures for the same flows.

a)

b)

c)

d)

Figure 11: Surface thermocouple data for the 4 cases at 3 axial locations: a) +2 cm, b) +4 cm, and c) -2 cm.
Insets in each figure show the trend in pyrolysis temperatures with flow. d) steady plateau pyrolysis
temperatures for all cases as a function of flow, and compares these values to the IR plateau values. The
inset shows the emissivity calculated from this comparison using Eqn. 1.
11

3.7 Surface Emissivity
Figure 11d plots the pyrolysis temperature data for the 3 locations and compares it with the IR
blackbody pyrolysis temperatures at the same X locations. The trends with flow are the same, but the
blackbody temperatures are always lower. A comparison can be made to determine the emissivity of
the pyrolyzing surface for the wavelength range of the flame filter. By definition, comparing
thermocouple measurements with blackbody IR temperatures (ε=1) readings the surface emissivity
is:

H

4
TIR  300 4
4
TTC  300 4

(1)

The estimated average emissivities are shown as dashed lines: 0.76 for the upstream pyrolyzing fuel
and 0.87 for the downstream pyrolyzing fuel. The variation with flow is within the error estimate
(±10%, based on IR temperature error estimates), but the differences between upstream and
downstream emissivities is slightly larger than this error, and the downstream emissivity is
consistently higher. This may be due to the prolonged preheating of the downstream fuel over the
large preheat length that allows a more thorough pyrolysis of the fuel.
3.8 Energy Balance
An energy balance can be used to evaluate the net heat flux from the flame (which includes
convection and radiation) to the fuel surface, neglecting the heat of pyrolysis. The energy balance
for the fuel is
x

q"net flame heat flux U sWCs

wTs
4
 HV (T 4  T f)
s
wt

(2)

Where ρsτ is the cellulose fuel half-area density of 0.003 g/cm2, Cs is the fuel heat capacity, 1.26 J/g
K, ε is the emissivity, which is unity for these black body temperature measurements, and σ is the
Stefan-Boltzmann constant (5.729x10-12 W/cm2 K4). Ts is the blackbody surface temperature in K,
and ambient temperature T∞ is 300K. The time derivative in surface temperature is evaluated by
simple difference over a 0.5 second interval at each pixel location along the line profile.
Figure 12 shows the resulting heat flux profiles for the four flow cases at 35% O2. The profiles stop
at ~0.2 W/cm2 at the low end of the IR operating temperature range of ~450K. Figure 13 plots
representative profiles relative to the peak heat flux for each flow. The upstream flame transitions
from the ignition to a steady-state leading edge peak heat flux followed by a plateau at about 1
W/cm2 for pyrolysis.
The downstream flame has a peak at burnout, and a long low level preheat beneath the flame. The
low level of downstream heat flux is due to the large flame standoff distance. The burnout peak
heat flux is only an estimate, since the pyrolysis term was neglected in the estimate and there is
clearly exothermic oxidative pyrolysis occurring at burnout at the 20 cm/s flow. Also, a significant
portion of the fuel surface above the pyrolysis temperature (~600K), as shown in Figure 4, especially
at the higher flows. At these low levels of heat flux beneath the downstream flame, and the

12

extensive length of elevated temperature surface, radiative loss is a much more significant term than
for the upstream flame.

Figure 12: Flame net heat feedback to the fuel surface based on the energy balance, Eq. (2). a)
2 cm/s, b) 5 cm/s, c)10 cm/s, d) 20 cm/s.

Figure 13: Representative heat flux profiles plotted relative to the peak location for a) downstream
flame and b) upstream flame.
13

The peak heat flux was extracted from the data and is plotted in Figure 14. Figure 14a shows the
steadiness of the upstream peak heat flux as a function of time. In Figure 14b the downstream flame
peaks at 20 cm/s vary considerably with time, which is attributed to the very sharp peak in the very
small burnout zone. Figure 14c takes the average values of the heat flux and plots them as a function
of the flow. The upstream heat flux increases linearly with flow, whereas the downstream heat flux
increases gradually at low flow, and is actually lower than for the upstream flame. At 10 cm/s when
the downstream flame begins to spread, the heat flux increases more rapidly. The error bars
represent the standard error of the data sets.

a)

b)

c)

Figure 14: Peak heat flux levels a) upstream flame as a function of time; b) downstream flame as a
function of time; c) average peak heat flux versus flow for both upstream and downstream flames.
14

3.9 Radiative heat transfer
3.9.1 Surface Radiative Heat Loss
The fraction of heat lost via surface radiative loss can be estimated using an average blackbody
pyrolysis temperature of Ts=650K:

loss fraction

x

4
V (T 4  T f)
s

(3)

q"net flame heat flux
The radiative heat loss for this
temperature is 0.98 W/cm2. The
average peak heat flux levels from
Figure 14c are used for the net flame
heat flux values. The loss fraction is
plotted in Figure 15. The loss
fraction drops with increasing flow as
one would expect. The upstream loss
fraction changes only slightly, but the
downstream losses increase
significantly at low flow. For the two
non-propagating downstream flames,
the losses exceed 70%, consistent with
[Olson et al. (2001)].
Figure 15: Estimated radiative loss fraction for the upstream and
downstream flames. For losses greater than 70%, no downstream
flame propagation is observed.

3.9.2 Gas-Phase Radiation

The gas phase radiation can also be estimated from the IR images in the gap where the fuel has
burned away. The emissions are primarily from soot at 3.8 microns, and we can directly calculate
the gas-phase radiation from the blackbody temperatures and the floor temperature of the IR camera
of 450K:
x

q"gas phase V (T 4  T 4 ) (4)
g
IRfloor
The temperatures were taken at +3 mm once the fuel burned away. The radiant flux is plotted in
Figure 16 as a function of time. For 2 cm/s and 5 cm/s the radiation does not change significantly
with time, and just exhibits a gradual decline as the flame moves upstream. At 10 cm/s and more so
at 20 cm/s there is an increase in gas-phase radiation as the leading edge of the flame moves away,
and then a decline after a peak in radiation as the peak sooting zone moves upstream as well. Figure
2 visible front views show that at 20 cm/s the soot zone is mostly upstream of the igniter location.
The inset to Figure 16 plots the peak values and average values as a function of flow. Both show a
linear increase with flow.

15

The gas-phase radiation can
be a heat loss mechanism
(especially for opposed flow
where the view-factors are
poor for preheating the
unburned fuel) or a heat
feedback to the fuel, which
is significant for the
downstream flame
preheating. To estimate
the relative importance of
the flame feedback on the
flame spread, we take the
ratio of average gas-phase
Figure 15: Estimated radiative loss fraction for the upstream and
radiation to the net flame
downstream flames. For losses greater than 70%, no downstream
heat flux. For the upstream
flame propagation is observed.
flame, the peak heat flux at
the leading edge is used, but
Figure 16: Gas-phase radiation estimates in the burnout gap as a
for the downstream flame,
function of time and (inset) average values as a function of flow.
the pre-peak heat flux was
used because we want to assess the importance of gas-phase radiation for preheating and pyrolysis
rather than burnout, where the peak flux occurs. The gas-phase fraction data are plotted in Figure 17
for upstream and downstream flames. For the upstream flame, gas-phase radiative feedback at the
leading edge is at most 20% of the net flux, but for downstream flame it exceeds 30% of the
feedback for those cases where the downstream flame was viable. It is thus a significant factor in
the viability of the downstream flame.
The relative magnitude of the surface loss
(~ 1 W/cm2) and the gas-phase radiation
feedback is interesting for the downstream
flame. Comparing this loss to the values in
the inset to Figure 16 show that at low flow
rates, where convective heat transfer is weak,
the gas-phase radiation is only ~ 15-30% of
the surface loss, so the losses dominate and
the downstream flame is not viable. At
higher flow rates the gas-phase feedback
approaches the level of the surface loss, thus
counteracting this loss to a large degree (up to
80%), and the flames are viable.
Figure 17: Fraction of the net flame heat flux that is attributed
to gas-phase radiation to the upstream leading edge of the flame
or the downstream preheating / pyrolysis.

16

The 10 cm/s flow case is a borderline case for
downstream spread. The peak heat flux is 1.8

W/cm2, and of that, the gas-phase feedback is an average of 0.4 W/cm2. Therefore, the convective
heat flux is approximately 1.4 W/cm2. The peak heat flux is still slightly less than the 2 cm/s
upstream flame which had a peak heat flux of 1.9 W/cm2. By 20 cm/s the downstream peak heat
flux is 5.2 W/cm2 and gas radiation feedback is a peak of 0.8 W/cm2, so the convective component is
4.4 W/cm2. At 5 cm/s, in contrast, the peak flux is only 1.2 W/cm2, and the radiative feedback is 0.2
W/cm2 of that. Convective flux is thus on the same order as the surface radiative loss, and the
downstream flame is not viable.
4. Discussion
Infrared imaging has been shown in the preceding sections to be a very useful quantitative diagnostic
to measure many aspects of flame spread and heat transfer in the flame zone. The shorter
wavelength IR camera is particularly well suited to measure the range of burning surface
temperatures. The flame filter at 3.8 microns eliminates most of the gas-phase radiation except soot.
Preheat and pyrolysis lengths are determined directly from the IR images in section 3.5. These
lengths can be very hard to determine from visible imaging, and usually at least 2 orthogonal views
are required.
The upstream spread rates in section 3.4 agree well with the visible spread rate measurements [Olson
et al. (2001), Prasad et al.], and the infrared measurement are expected to be more reliable since the
visible flame is very luminous and increases in brightness as the test progresses and the burnout gap
grows in time. Comparison with the model predictions for this same experimental configuration
and test conditions [Prasad et al.], shows that the model predicts a weaker flame than is
experimentally observed. At 1.5 cm/s, the model predicts a flamelet (3D), whereas at 2 cm/s the
experiment exhibits a steady planar upstream flame spread across the full sample. At 10 cm/s the
model predicts that the downstream spread will occur along the edges. A similar type of spread was
in fact observed at 5 cm/s in air [Olson et al. (2001)] where an upstream flame spread away from a
central ignition spot and, after spreading to the upstream edge of the sample, wrapped back around
along the edges to form a downstream flame spread. In this paper, at 10 cm/s, 35% O2, the
downstream flame is spreading along the entire sample width. At 20 cm/s, both model and
experiment observe flame separation and subsequent two simultaneously propagating flames.
The heat flux estimates from the infrared measurements in section 3.8 are better than those based on
the thermocouple data, which needed to be smoothed and differentiated [Olson et al. (2001)]. In
contrast, simple finite differencing is used here. Comparison with these previous estimates for 35%
O2 tests shows that the linear increase with flow trend is the same, but the magnitude of the
upstream heat flux is lower via the infrared measurements.
Quantitative heat flux estimates for upward and downward spread over thick cast PMMA using
holographic interferometry [Ito and Kashiwagi (1988)] agree in general trends presented here, but
the magnitude of the heat flux is different for this thick material. For downward spread, they found
the peak heat flux increased rapidly to 7 W/cm2 within a short 3.4 mm of preheating, and for upward
spread they found a much lower gradually increasing heat flux over approximately 5 cm of sample
that reaches 2.8 W/cm2 at the vaporization front (burnout is not reported for this thick material).
These length scales and relative peak values (factor of ~2.5 for upstream to downstream) agree with
those seen in Figure 13, except the for the burnout peak flux for the downstream flame.

17

5. Conclusions
The infrared surface temperature image data obtained during microgravity testing of cellulose
ignition and flame spread have been analyzed to provide quantitative temperature gradients, preheat
lengths, flame spread rates, and net flame heat flux to the fuel sample for simultaneous upstream and
downstream flame spread. Four cases have been examined that range from upstream only spread to
a clearly simultaneous upstream and downstream flame spread. The results highlight the differences
in the structure of the two halves of the flame as they spread apart. Upstream flame spread is
controlled by the leading edge of the flame. Net heat flux increases with increasing flow, as does the
flame spread rate. Downstream flames have very long preheat lengths with a very low heat flux, and
are at higher flow rates are anchored to the fuel at the flame base which provides a sharp spike in the
heat flux to consume the fuel. At low flow rates the downstream flame is not viable due to the low
heating rate and the significant radiative losses. The infrared surface temperature data reported here
can provide added depth to the model comparisons.

6.

Acknowledgements

This work was jointly supported by a NASA/ NEDO international agreement. The microgravity
experiments of this work were performed at JAMIC (Japan Microgravity Center) during March,
1999 under the management of JSUP (Japan Space Utilization Promotion Center) as a part of an
R&D project of advanced combustion science utilizing microgravity by NEDO (New Energy and
Industrial Technology Development Organization of Japan). The authors would like to thank NASA
electrical engineer Mike Capelety and the NASA TIGER engineering team for supporting the rig
buildup and testing. The authors would also like to thank Kenichi Ito, Katsuhiro Nishizawa and
JAMIC facility personnel in performing the microgravity experiments.

18

7. References
Bhattacharjee, S., Altenkirch, R.A., Olson, S.L., and Sotos, R.G.; J. Heat Transfer 113 (3), 670-676,
1991.
Cordova, J.L., Walther, D.C., Torero, J.L., and Fernandez-Pello, A.C., Combust. Sci. and Tech. 164
(1) 253-278, 2001.
Di Blasi, Combust. Flame 100, 332-340, 1995.
Feier, I. I., Shih, H.-Y., Sacksteder, K.R., and T’ien, J.S.; Proc. Comb. Inst. 29 (2002), 2569-2577.
Ferkul, P.V., and T’ien, J.S.; Combust. Sci and Tech. 99 345-370, 1994.
Fernandez-Pello, A.C., Combustion Fundamentals of Fire, Chapter 2 “The Solid Phase”, Academic
Press Limited, 1995.
Hirano, T., and Saito, K.; Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 20, 461-485, 1994.
Hirano, T., Noreikis, S.E., and Waterman, T.E.; Combust. Flame 23, 83-96, 1974.
Ito, A., and Kashiwagi, T.; Combust. Flame 71, 189-204, 1988.
Kleinhenz, J., Ferkul, P., Pettegrew, R., Sacksteder, K.R., and T’ien, J.S.; Fire & Materials 29
(2005), 27-37.
Kumar, A., Shih, H.-Y., and T’ien, J.S.; Combust. Flame 132, 667-677, 2003.
Olson, S.L., Combustion Science and Technology, 76,4-6, pp. 233-249, 1991.
Olson, S.L., Kashiwagi, T., Fujita, O., Kikuchi, M., and Ito, K.; Combust. Flame 125, 852-864,
2001.
Olson, S.L., Hegde, U., Bhattacharjee, S., Deering, J.L. Tang, L., and Altenkirch, R.A.; Combust.
Sci. and Tech. 176, 557-584, 2004.
Nakamura, Y., Kashiwagi, T., McGrattan, K.B., and Baum, H.R.; Combust. Flame 130, 307-321,
2002.
Prasad, K., Nakamura, Y., Olson, S.L., Fujita, O., Nishizawa, K., Ito, K., and Kashiwagi, T., Proc.
Comb. Inst. 29 (2002) 2553-2560.
Quintiere, J.G.; Fundamentals of Fire Phenomena, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2006.
Ross, H.D., ed. Microgravity Combustion: Fire in Free Fall, Academic Press, 2001.
Ross, H. D. and. Miller, F. J. Twenty-sixth International Symposium on Combustion, 1327–1334.
Combustion Institute, 1996.
Sanchez-Tarifa, C. and Lazaro, B., First International Symposium on Microgravity Research and
Applications on Physical Sciences and Biotechnology, 2000.
T’ien, J. S., Combust. Flame 65:31–34 (1986).

19

