Determination of Survivable Fires
D. L. Dietrich∗ J. E. Niehaus, G. A. Ruﬀ, D. L. Urban
,
NASA John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135, USA

F. Takahashi, J. W. Easton, A. A. Abbott
National Center for Space Exploration Research, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135, USA

J. C. Graf
NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, 77058, USA
At NASA, there exists no standardized design or testing protocol for spacecraft ﬁre suppression systems
(either handheld or total ﬂooding designs). An extinguisher’s eﬃcacy in safely suppressing any reasonable or
conceivable ﬁre is the primary benchmark. That concept, however, leads to the question of what a reasonable
or conceivable ﬁre is. While there exists the temptation to ‘over-size’ the ﬁre extinguisher, weight and volume
considerations on spacecraft will always (justiﬁably) push for the minimum size extinguisher required. This
paper attempts to address the question of extinguisher size by examining how large a ﬁre a crew member
could successfully survive and extinguish in the conﬁnes of a spacecraft.
The hazards to the crew and equipment during an accidental ﬁre include excessive pressure rise resulting
in a catastrophic rupture of the vehicle skin, excessive temperatures that burn or incapacitate the crew (due
to hyperthermia), carbon dioxide build-up or other accumulation of other combustion products (e.g. carbon
monoxide). Estimates of these quantities are determined as a function of ﬁre size and mass of material
burned. This then becomes the basis for determining the maximum size of a target ﬁre for future ﬁre extinguisher testing.

I.

Introduction and Background

Future exploration missions call for extending a human presence into space beyond low Earth orbit where,
in the event of an emergency, a rapid return to earth is not an option. An accidental ﬁre is an emergency
situation that can easily have dire consequences if it is not detected and extinguished quickly and eﬀectively.
Therefore, the crew must have the equipment, systems, and procedures to safely deal with any possible ﬁre
and its after-eﬀects. The ﬁrst line of defense in a ﬁre safety strategy is ﬁre prevention through material
selection and control. Experience in manned space ﬂight, however, indicates that this control may, but will
not necessarily, ensure that ﬁres on spacecraft will not occur. Therefore, ﬁre detection and suppression
systems are still requireda .
Fortunately accidental ﬁres have been very rare on space vehicles. There are, however, open questions
about the size of a potential ﬁre in spacecraft. For total ﬂooding agents involving an inert gas, it is a relatively
simple exercise to compute the required mass of suppressant given the concentration needed to suppress a ﬁre
irrespective of ﬁre size. Detailed Computation Fluid Dynamic (CFD) simulations of suppressant dispersal
would provide an even better tool to design the suppressant system. In practice the dispersal of an inert gas
suppressant to a concentration required to suppress a likely ﬁre would result in a vehicle over-pressure and
an oxygen concentration too low for crew survival. Therefore, inert gas suppressants are not necessarily an
optimal solution for a spacecraft suppression system.1–3
Streaming or local application agents can safely and quickly extinguish many ﬁres. As a result, all NASA
and most foreign manned spacecraft provide a hand-held extinguisher. The size of these extinguishers,
∗ Aerospace

Engineer, NASA John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135, AIAA Member.
Soyuz capsules have no dedicated ﬁre suppression capability. This is a programmatic risk that U.S. vehicles have
not accepted since the Mercury and Gemini programs.
a Russian

1 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

however, is typically based on terrestrial ﬁre standards and not the unique properties of microgravity ﬁres
and hazards of the spacecraft environment. The temptation of the designers is to ‘over-size’ the extinguisher
to compensate for any uncertainty in ﬁre size or severity. Severe weight and volume limitations, however,
will always push back on the ‘over-size’ design idea. Recently, we introduced the concept of a ‘survivable ﬁre’
to guide the design and qualiﬁcation of a hand-held ﬁre extinguisher for future spacecraft.4 In this paper we
expand on this concept and discuss in detail the speciﬁc risks to the crew and introduce estimates to their
severity.

II.

Crew and Vehicle Risks from Fire

In order for a ﬁre to occur, all three elements of the ﬁre triangle must be present, fuel, oxygen and an
ignition source. In a manned spacecraft, the ﬁrst two will invariably be present, even with very strict material
controls. The ignition source can be a number of things, nearly all of which are the result of equipment
malfunction. Assuming there is a release of energy suﬃcient to initiate a ﬁre, the chemical reaction between
˙
the fuel and oxygen will result in heat release QCOMB (t). The time dependence emphasizes the fact that,
assuming suﬃcient fuel and oxygen, the ﬂame will grow with time after ignition. As the ﬁre burns, it
consumes fuel and oxygen, produces carbon dioxide and water vapor and releases heat. The process presents
some very real hazards to the crew.
II.A.

Carbon Dioxide Toxicity

Carbon dioxide (CO2 ), a product of both ﬁre and human metabolism, is a threat to human health in high
enough concentrations. The Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentration (SMAC)5 for carbon dioxide
provides a guide for determining a limit. The level is currently a maximum of 2.0% for 1 hour and 1.3% for
24 hours.
A critical component of all spacecraft environmental systems is the scrubbing system for carbon dioxide. These systems are designed to remove the metabolically produced carbon dioxide from the spacecraft
atmosphere. For reference, individual carbon dioxide production can vary from 0.5 to 4.0 l/min at ATP
(atmospheric or room temperature and pressure conditions, 20 C and 1 atm, respectively) from rest to moderately strenuous exercise. In comparison, a birthday candle produces approximately 0.18 l/min of carbon
dioxide at ATP conditions (burning in normal gravity). So while the spacecraft Environmental Control
and Life Support Systems (ECLSS) can remove carbon dioxide, in the event of a ﬁre, the carbon dioxide
production could exceed the removal capability of the ECLSS and it would accumulate to dangerous levels.
˙
If the heat release proﬁle of the ﬂame, QCOMB (t), is known or assumed, then the carbon dioxide accumulation rate ([nCO2 (t)]acc ) is simply
˙
[nCO2 (t)]acc =
˙

˙
QCOMB (t) νCO2
− [nCO2 (t)]ECLSS ,
˙
Qcomb MO2

(1)

where Qcomb is the heat generation per mass of oxygen consumed, MO2 is the molar mass of oxygen, νCO2
is the stoichiometric coeﬃcient that represents the number of moles of carbon dioxide produced per mole
of oxygen consumed and [nCO2 (t)]ECLSS is the rate of carbon dioxide removal by the vehicle ECLSS. For
˙
this study, we assume Qcomb = 13, 100 kJ/kgO2 typical for a wide range of fuels and a fuel with an average
molecular composition of C6 H10 O5 .6, 7 The mole fraction of carbon dioxide is then simply the integrated
t
molar mass ( t=0 [nCO2 (t)]acc dt) normalized by the total molar mass of gas in the vehicle.
˙
II.B.

Excessive Temperature

A ﬁre in an open cabin releases a signiﬁcant amount of energy to the spacecraft cabin. The high temperatures
from this energy release pose two signiﬁcant hazards to the crew and vehicle. The ﬁrst is the immediate
hazard of heat ﬂux or high temperature gas from the ﬁre burning that either burns the crew or damages
critical spacecraft life support systems. The burns could be external (skin) from the ﬂame radiant ﬂux or
internal (lung and airways) from inhalation of high temperature gas. The second is the longer-term eﬀect of
a high temperature environment that could severely injure the crew by creating a hyperthermic environment.

2 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

II.B.1.

Excessive Heat Flux

An immediate hazard posed by any ﬁre is skin burns and damage to the lungs and airways from inhaling
high temperature gas. The threat is obviously greater the closer the crew is to the ﬂame. For human-crewed
spacecraft, this poses two unique threats. First, the small volume of a spacecraft greatly limits the distance
the crew can be from the ﬁre. Second, in microgravity, the heat ﬂux and gas temperature will not have the
strong directional dependence that a ﬂame in normal gravity has.
˙
Assuming the heat ﬂux from a ﬂame with size QCOMB (t) is present in the cabin, the heat ﬂux a distance
rcrew from the ﬂame is
qcrew (t) =
˙

˙
η QCOMB (t)
2
2 π rcrew

(2)

In this expression, we assume that the ﬂame power is transferred into a hemisphere as if the ﬂame is against
a solid insulating surface (with no heat loss). The term η is a factor between 0.0 and 1.0 that simply accounts
for any heat transfer to a solid surface or directional component of the heat transfer. With a heat ﬂux given
by Equation 2 above, it becomes a matter of understanding the magnitude of the threat to the crew.
Stoll and Chianta8 provide data on the time to a second degree burn as a function of heat ﬂux to the
skin. Second degree burns involve redness and blistering of the skin and depending on the severity can result
in serious infections. They typically take several weeks to heal. A second degree burn over a large portion
of a crew member’s body would represent very serious medical concern. We use this data as a guide for the
maximum exposure time and consider that it would take the crew on the order of approximately 60 seconds
to extinguish a ﬁre.
Understanding the threat to the crew due to excessively high temperature inhaled air again assumes
that the energy released by the ﬁre is distributed symmetrically around the ﬁre. If we assume that the
ﬁre occupies a volume with a given radius (rFIRE ), then the steady-state radial distribution of temperature
(Tg (r)) is
Tg (r) =

rFIRE
r

rCABIN − r
rCABIN − rFIRE

TFIRE +

rCABIN
r

r − rCABIN
rCABIN − rFIRE

TCABIN ,

(3)

where rCABIN and TCABIN are the approximate radius and temperature of the spacecraft and TFIRE is the
˙
temperature of the ﬁre.9 The heat-release rate of the ﬁre (Q (t)) is
(TFIRE − TCABIN ) rCABIN rFIRE
˙
Q (t) =
4 π λg

(4)

where λg is the thermal conductivity of the gas, assumed to be air at one atm pressure and ambient
temperature.
Lva and co-workers10 performed a detailed analysis of tracheal burning from inhaled heated gas. Their
analysis used a maximum inhaled gas of approximately 373 K as the base for the computation and predicted
signiﬁcant damage immediately after exposure and more serious damage to deeper tissue after a longer
exposure. We therefore consider this to be the temperature limit for short duration exposure.
II.B.2.

Hyperthermic Environment

In the event of an accidental ﬁre, the heat release will cause a temperature rise in the cabin. The primary
mechanism to dissipate the heat from the cabin gas is radiation and convection heat transfer to the vehicle
(assumed to be at a constant temperature) and through the ECLSS systems. While the immediate concern
in the event of a ﬁre is burn injuries to the crew and damage to the vehicle, there is also a risk to the crew
in the long-term if the cabin temperature remains too high for too long. The cabin gas temperature as a
function of time (Tg (t)) is simply
d (nCABIN Tg )
4
4
˙
¯
= QCOMB (t) − aP VFIRE σ Tf − Tw − hCABIN ACABIN Tg − Tw
(5)
dt
where Cv,g is the average (constant volume) speciﬁc heat of the gas, nCABIN is the molar mass of gas in the
˙
cabin and QCOMB is the combustion heat-release rate. The second term on the right hand side of Equation 5
is the radiative heat transfer between the ﬂame and the walls of the cabin. The expression includes radiative
Cv,g

3 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

transfer (σ is the Stefan-Boltzman constant) from combustion-produced carbon dioxide and water vapor
through the Planck Mean Absorption Coeﬃcient (aP ), but neglects solid particulate heat transfer. The
third term on the right hand side of Equation 5 is the convective heat transfer (with heat transfer coeﬃcient
hCABIN ) between the cabin air and the walls of the cabin (with area ACABIN and volume VCABIN assumed to
be at a constant temperature). For the sample calculations herein, we assume that the volume of the ﬁre
(VFIRE ) is the volume of the cabin (VCABIN ).
Hyperthermia results when the body’s compensatory mechanisms cannot dissipate the excess metabolic
energy. It is a complex problem beyond the scope of the present analysis, but can occur at temperatures
as low as 311 K. For the present analysis, however, we assume a properly hydrated, physically ﬁt crew and
that hyperthermia will occur if the cabin gas temperature remains above 330 K for longer than 60 minutes.
II.C.

Vehicle Over-pressurization

As a ﬂame burns in the sealed volume of a spacecraft, the temperature rise in the cabin as detailed in Section
II.B.2 will result in a pressure rise. At some point, the cabin pressure will exceed the capabilities of the
vehicle and the pressure relief system will vent gases from the cabin to space to maintain the structural
integrity of the vehicle. If the pressure rise is too rapid and exceeds the pressure relief capability of the
vehicle a catastrophic structural failure could occur.
The pressure rise associated with the ﬁre is inconsequential to the health of the crew, the hazard is to the
health of the spacecraft. While activating the pressure-relief system is not desired, it is certainly preferable to
a rupture of the spacecraft structure. The pressure in the cabin (PCABIN ) is simply related to the temperature
through the ideal gas law assuming the volume of the spacecraft is known.
PCABIN =

nCABIN Ru Tg
VCABIN

(6)

where Ru is the universal gas constant. Gokoglu and co-workers11 performed a detailed analysis for a largescale ﬁre experiment proposed for an ISS re-supply vehicle (e.g. HTV, ATV, etc.) using this approach and
achieved good agreement with experimental data (albeit in much smaller chambers).
II.D.

Oxygen Depletion

Fire consumes oxygen and thus will compete with the crew for the available oxygen in the cabin. In the
reduced gravity environment of space (or even the Moon or Mars), a ﬁre can burn to relatively low oxygen
mole fractions before it will extinguish.1–3 The exact limit depends on the material burning and other
environmental factors (e.g., air speed) but in general, the ﬂame will burn at oxygen concentrations that are
unsuitable for human survival. Therefore, any consideration of a survivable ﬁre should include an analysis
of the oxygen consumption. The molar depletion of oxygen is
[nO2 (t)]acc =
˙

˙
QCOMB (t) νO2
,
Qcomb MO2

(7)

where Qcomb is the heat generation per mass of oxygen consumed, MO2 is the molar mass of oxygen, νO2 = 1
(the stoichiometric coeﬃcient for oxygen. The mole fraction of oxygen is then simply the integrated molar
t
mass (nO2 (t = 0) − t=0 [nCO2 (t)]acc dt) normalized by the total molar mass of gas in the vehicle.
˙
II.E.

Atmospheric Contamination

The primary products of combustion are carbon dioxide and water vapor. The analysis above assumes
complete reaction and is a reasonable assumption for total heat release and carbon dioxide production. The
high temperatures during combustion, however, also result in incomplete oxidation of the fuel (especially for
under-ventilated ﬂames) and the production of gaseous products and particulates that can be dangerous to
the crew. The most common of these pollutants is carbon monoxide. There are, however, a host of other
products that are of concern. The threat to the crew can be immediate in the case of carbon monoxide or a
longer-term concern to crew health (e.g., lung damage from smoke particulate).
For this initial analysis, we only consider the production of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide as other
gaseous and particulate species require a detailed speciﬁcation of the burning material. Predicting carbon
monoxide from a generic ’ﬁre’ without a speciﬁcation of the material and environment is diﬃcult. The best
4 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

approach is to consider the chemical equilibrium12 of a mass of fuel (mf ) reacting with a speciﬁed mass or
volume of oxygen. The analysis considers poly-methylmethacrylate (PMMA, [C5 H8 O2 ]n ) as the fuel with
air as the oxidizer. The balanced chemical equation for methacrylate is
C5 H8 O2 + 6 O2 → 5 CO2 + 4 H2 O,

(8)

which means the stoichiometric molar ratio of fuel to oxidizer is (1/6). The equivalence ratio (φ) is the
ratio of the actual fuel to oxidizer ratio to the stoichiometric fuel to oxidizer ratio. For the reaction system
considered, the fuel to air ratio (F/O) is
(F/O) =

(mf /Mf ) Mair
0.21 VCABIN η ρair

(9)

where mf is the mass of PMMA, Mf and Mair are the molar masses of the fuel and air, respectively, ρair
is the density of air and η is a factor between 0 and 1.0 that representing the fraction of cabin air that
participates in the reaction.
The results presented herein use -184.5 kJ/gmol for the heat of formation of the fuel.7 The chemical
equilibrium calculation12 then produces estimates of the mixture temperature and mole fractions of carbon
dioxide and carbon monoxide. The analysis then assumes that this burned mixture of gases mixes uniformly
throughout the cabin to produce estimates of the gas temperature and carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide
mole fractions.

III.

Results and Discussion

The analysis in the previous section allows us to estimate the risks to the crew and vehicle from the various
hazards imposed by an accidental ﬁre. The computations are strongly dependent on the size of the vehicle.
For reference, we assume a sealed volume the approximate size of the Destiny module on the International
Space Station (ISS). The assumed volume (approximate gas volume) and surface area (approximate internal
surface area) are 65 m3 and 150 m2 , respectively.
Equation 5 is a simple ﬁrst order ordinary diﬀerential equation easily solved after specifying the ﬁre power
˙
(QCOMB (t)). We assume a ﬁre that grows with a growth coeﬃcient13 of 0.0029 kW/s2 which is consistent with
a slow growing ﬁre. The ﬁre grows for a preset period of time, remains at a constant power for a speciﬁed
time and then reduces to 0 (an extinguished ﬁre) for another speciﬁed time period. Specifying the ﬁre power
also then allows the computation of cabin pressure and oxygen and carbon dioxide mole fractions using the
ideal gas law and Equations 1 and 7, respectively. Figure 1 shows the result of the computation for what we
consider to be a large and small ﬁre that burn approximately 3 and 0.5 kg of material, respectively.
Figure 1 shows the ﬁre power (an input to the model) and the average cabin pressure, temperature and
carbon dioxide and oxygen mole fractions as a function of time. The cabin pressure and temperature increase
as the ﬁre grows from time zero (zero ﬁre power). As the gas temperature increases, the heat transfer to
the walls (by radiation and convection) begins to increase, eventually exceeding the power of the ﬁre. When
this occurs the gas temperature and cabin pressure begin to decrease even if the ﬁre continues to grow. The
mole fractions of oxygen and carbon dioxide continuously increase with time until the ﬁre is extinguished,
at which time they remain constant.
The computation predicts that each of the ﬁres will exceed the cabin pressure limitations. We assume
that the pressure relief system on the vehicle would be suﬃcient to vent gas out of the vehicle to maintain
structural integrity, although it would not be diﬃcult to verify that assumption given the speciﬁcations of
the relief valve. If, however, the rate of pressure rise exceeds the capability of the pressure relief system, the
ﬁre could compromise the spacecraft structure.
The ambient gas temperature for the large ﬁre is disconcerting. The average (not peak) gas temperature
exceeds limits for safe breathing even for a short time and would result in tracheal burning. In addition, the
temperature could result in a hyperthermic condition for the crew, especially if their activity level were high
(as would be expected in an emergency condition). The small ﬁre results in a temperature environment that
would surely be uncomfortable, but not likely life threatening.
The large ﬁre also results in an environment that has oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations that
are considered either dangerous or lethal. The computation, however, does not assume any carbon dioxide
removal or oxygen replenishment from the ECLSS systems. Again, the analysis could be easily updated
given the speciﬁcation of these systems.
5 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Fire Power ( kW )

150

Small Fire
Total Fuel Consumed ~ 0.5 kg
Temperature
CO2 Mole Fraction
O2 Mole Fraction
Fire Power
Pressure

100

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

50

Average Cabin Pressure ( atm )

Large Fire
Total Fuel Consumed ~ 3 kg
Temperature
CO2 Mole Fraction
O2 Mole Fraction
Fire Power
Pressure

1.1

0

1.0

500
0.20

450
0.15

400
0.10

350
0.05

CO2 and O2 Mole Fractions

Average Gas Temperature ( K )

O2

CO2

300

0.00
0

200

400

600

800

1000sec

Time From Start of Fire ( sec )
Figure 1. Predictions of average cabin gas temperature, pressure and oxygen and carbon dioxide mole fractions for an
arbitrarily considered large and small ﬁre. The graph shows the ﬁre power proﬁle assumed in the computation.

6 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 2 shows the ambient gas temperature as a function of distance away from the ﬂame using Equations
3 and 4 for a range of ﬁre sizes. These results show the approximate spatial distribution of gas temperature
whereas Figure 1 shows the volume-averaged gas temperatures. The results show that gas temperatures
remain dangerously high at relatively large distances from the ﬂame even for relatively small ﬁres. These
results may seem counterintuitive based on experience with terrestrial ﬁres. The important fact to remember,
however, is that for a terrestrial ﬁre the gas temperature is very high above the ﬂame owing to the buoyant
ﬂowb . The ﬂame energy is omnidirectional in microgravity. Figure 2 does not account for any air circulation
which would lower the temperature. The actual temperature at any radial location would be between the
cabin-averaged gas temperature in Figure 1 and the spatially-resolved temperature in Figure 2. The results
in Figure 2 therefore likely overestimate the gas temperature the crew would be exposed to.
0.55 kW
1.10 kW
1.64 kW
2.20 kW
3.30 kW
4.40 kW
5.50 kW
23 kW
35 kW

1400

Gas Temperature ( K )

1200

Increasing Fire Size

1000

800

600

400

0

1

2

3

4

5m

Radial Distance from Fire ( m )
Figure 2. Gas temperature as a function of radial distance from the ﬁre for a number of ﬁre sizes. The analysis
assumes a spherical ﬂame at 1500 K with the radius of the ﬁre determining the ﬁre size. The dashed line at 400 K is
the approximate limit for breathing without tracheal burning.

Figure 3 shows the maximum exposure time computed time using a heat ﬂux from Equation with η = 1
and the heat exposure data of Stoll and Chianta8 for several radial distances from the ﬂame. The exposure
data required extrapolation for times longer than 30 seconds. The maximum exposure time is the time it
would take for the crew to receive second degree burns from the ﬁre. For reference, a reasonable distance
to eﬀectively ﬁght a ﬁre using a conventional handheld ﬁre extinguisher would be approximately 2 m. This
simpliﬁed analysis shows that the crew could eﬀectively ﬁght a 100 kW ﬁre for approximately 30 sec before
receiving second degree burns. During this time, the ﬁre would be either diminished in size (in turn reducing
the burn risk to the crew) or entirely extinguished.
Finally, Figures 4 and 5 show the predicted cabin temperature and mole fractions of carbon monoxide
and carbon dioxide, respectively, as a function of fuel mass. The chemical equilibrium computation assumes
adiabatic combustion of the fuel mass with cabin air with the fraction cabin air participating in the combustion (η) varying between 0.01 and 0.3 to maintain the stoichiometry or unity equivalence ratio. The
cabin temperature in Figure 4 is a bit higher than that in Figure 1 for the same fuel mass. This is because
the chemical equilibrium neglects heat transfer, something that is explicitly included in the computation
in Figure 1. The predicted temperatures, while higher than expected, again show the threat to the crew
b You

can hold your hand very close to the side of a candle ﬂame without discomfort. The authors do not recommend holding
your hand that same distance above the ﬂame.

7 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Distance from Fire
0.5 m
1.0 m
1.5 m
2.0 m
3.0 m
4.0 m
5.0 m

160

Maximum Exposure Time ( s )

140
120
100

Increasing Distance from Fire
80
60
40
20

0

20

40

60

80

100

Fire Size ( kW )
Figure 3. Exposure time as a function of ﬁre size (kW ) for a number of radial distances from the ﬁre. The simpliﬁed
analysis assumes the energy is distributed in a hemisphere around the ﬁre.

posed by most ﬁres. The average temperatures for all but the smallest ﬁres exceed the inhaled gas limit of
approximately 400 K.
The predictions in Figure 5 for carbon dioxide are in good agreement with those in Figure 1 for the
transient combustion analysis. This serves as a good check for the transient analysis. Again, for all but the
smaller ﬁre sizes, the carbon dioxide mole fractions are high enough to warrant concern for the crew. The
analysis again does not consider any carbon dioxide removal from the ECLSS systems.
The predictions in Figure 5 show that for almost all ﬁre sizes considered, the carbon monoxide mole
fraction is well above that which is considered safe for the crew. While it is expected that the crew will have
emergency equipment to deal with carbon monoxide (i.e., a ﬁltering respirator), the results highlight the
need for such equipment. If emergency equipment, such as a respirator, were not available, carbon monoxide
toxicity would be the crew hazard that most limited ﬁre size. The results again neglect any removal of
carbon monoxide by the ECLSS systems.
As a point of reference, it is useful to consider the Solid Fuel Oxygen Generator (SFOG) ﬁre aboard
the Russian Mir Orbiting Station. There exists, to the best of our knowledge, very little quantitative
information about this ﬁre. Cabin pressure readings during the ﬁre are not available (at least to the authors).
Assuming that the SFOG provided both the fuel (stainless steel) and oxidizer (oxygen), we can use the heat of
combustion for stainless steel (8.16 kJ/g). The ﬁre power then requires the mass of stainless steel consumed
and the time duration of the burn. The mass of material consumed is unknown. Examining the design we
estimate (with very large error bars) approximately 0.15 kg of material consumed. Estimates of the total
burn time also vary between 180 and 600 sec. If we assume a median value of 300 sec, the ﬁre power was
approximately 4 kW , or much smaller than the small ﬁre in Figure 1. The value, however, could be much
higher (although still likely smaller than the peak power of the small ﬁre in Figure 1) if a larger mass of
metal was consumed. Also, for metal combustion it is not well known how much of the energy release goes
into the gas phase and how much goes to raising the metal temperature (that eventually gets released to
the gas phase, but over a MUCH longer time). Finally, given that the fuel was stainless steel and the SFOG
provided oxygen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide data is not all that relevant (and similarly
unavailable).

8 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Average Gas Temperature ( K )

700

600

500

400

300
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Fuel Mass ( kg )
Figure 4. Average cabin temperature as a function of fuel mass (burned) computed assuming chemical equilibrium.
The analysis assumes adiabatic combustion so the gas temperatures are higher than the heat transfer analysis in Figure
1.

6x10

-3

-3

50x10

Carbon Monoxide
Carbon Dioxide

40

4
30
3
20
2

Carbon Dioxide Mole Fraction

Carbon Monoxide Mole Fraction

5

10

1

0
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Fuel Mass ( kg )
Figure 5. Average carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide mole fractions as a function of fuel mass assuming chemical
equilibrium. The dashed lines are the 1 hour SMAC limits for carbon monoxide (425 ppm and carbon dioxide (0.02
mole fraction).

9 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

IV.

Conclusions

This paper introduces the concept of a survivable ﬁre for the purpose of ﬁre extinguisher sizing and
testing. The analysis considers the hazards to the crew from such things as over-pressure of the vehicle,
excessive cabin temperatures and burns to the crew and exposure to toxic levels of combustion products and
reduced oxygen. Simpliﬁed expressions are used to estimate these various quantities as a function of ﬁre size.
A ﬁre is considered ‘survivable’ if the gas temperatures, pressures carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and
oxygen partial pressures and heat ﬂux in the vehicle remain below critical thresholds (except for oxygen
where it must remain above the threshold). While these threshold levels are invariant with vehicle size,
the time dependent quantities are strong functions of vehicle size; smaller vehicles having much smaller
survivable ﬁre sizes.
A sample analysis is conducted for a spacecraft the approximate size of the Destiny module on the ISS.
The results show that ﬁres involving 3 kg of fuel produce a maximum power of approximately 200 kW . For
ﬁres of this size, there are multiple threats to the crew. The gas temperatures would likely burn the throat
and lungs on inhalation and the result in hyperthermia over a long duration. The crew would also likely be
burned if they were any reasonable distance from the ﬁre. Finally, the oxygen, carbon dioxide and carbon
monoxide mole fractions are all predicted to be nearly lethal.
For smaller ﬁres that burn on the order of 0.5 kg of material (peak ﬁre powers between 50 and 100 kW )
the ﬁre would create uncomfortable, but not lethal, environmental conditions. The exception to that would
be carbon monoxide production which emphasizes the need for some kind of respirator in the event of a ﬁre.
The analysis could and should be extended to include the mitigating eﬀects of the vehicle ECLSS systems.
The pressure relief system will likely vent to maintain the vehicle pressure within safe limits. The crew
could be on supplemental oxygen to mitigate the risk of hypoxic conditions. Further, carbon dioxide and
carbon monoxide will eventually be removed from the cabin atmosphere to mitigate the dangers to the crew
from toxic combustion by-products. Similarly, the vehicle heat rejection systems will eventually return the
gas temperature to ambient values and protective gear could mitigate the hazards posed by exposure to
excessive heat ﬂuxes and gas temperatures. All of these mitigations will increase the size of a survivable
ﬁre, but require hardware and procedures to implement into the spacecraft. The analysis in this document
allows design engineers to make rationale decisions regarding the safety hardware and procedures required
for ﬁreﬁghting aboard a spacecraft. Finally, the analysis could also be extended to include other factors
considered to be a risk to the crew.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of P.V. Ferkul of the National Center for Space
Exploration Research on ﬁre size estimates.

References
1 Dietrich, D. L., Ruﬀ, G. A., and Urban, D. L., “Fundamentals of Fire Suppression in Reduced Gravity Environments,”
38th International Conference on Environmental Systems, No. 2008-01-2087, Society for Automotive Engineers, San Francisco,
California, July 2008.
2 Dietrich, D. L., Ruﬀ, G. A., Urban, D. L., Hicks, M. C., Stocker, D. P., Nayagam, V., and Takahashi, F., “Fire Suppression
Technology in Human-Crewed Spacecraft - A Trade Study,” 37th International Conference on Environmental Systems, No.
07ICES-112, Society for Automotive Engineers, Chicago, Illinois, July 2007.
3 Dietrich, D. L., Ruﬀ, G. A., and Urban, D. L., “A Fire Suppression Analysis for the Altair Project,” 39th International
Conference on Environmental Systems, No. 2009-01-2511, Society for Automotive Engineers, Savannah, Georgia, July 2009.
4 Dietrich, D. L., Ruﬀ, G. A., Easton, J. W., Abbott, A. A., Graf, J. C., Gianettino, D. P., and Sager, C. L., “Towards the
Development of a Speciﬁcation for a Portable Fine Water Mist Fire Extinguisher for Spacecraft Applications,” 41st International
Conference on Environmental Systems, No. AIAA-2011-5050, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Portland,
Oregon, July 2011.
5 National Research Council, “Spacecraft Maximum Allowable Concentrations for Selected Airborne Contaminants,” Tech.
rep., National Research Council of the National Academies, Washington, DC, 2008.
6 Huggett, C., “Estimation of Rate of Heat Release by Means of Oxygen Consumption Meausrements,” Fire and Materials,
Vol. 4, No. 2, 1980, pp. 61 – 65.
7 Walters, R. N., Hackett, S. M., and Lyon, R. E., “Heats of Combustion of High Temperatuyre Polymers,” Fire and
Materials, Vol. 24, No. 5, May 2000, pp. 245 – 252.
8 Stoll, A. M. and Chianta, M. A., “Method and Rating System for Evaluation of Thermal Protection,” Aerospace Medicine,
Vol. 40, 1969, pp. 1232 – 1238.

10 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

9 Ozisik,

M. N., Heat Transfer - A Basic Approach, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York, New York, 1985.
Y.-G., Liua, J., and Zhang, J., “Theoretical evaluation of burns to the human respiratory tract due to inhalation of
hot gas in the early stage of ﬁres,” Burns, Vol. 32, No. 4, June 2006, pp. 436 – 446.
11 Gokoglu, S. A., Niehaus, J. E., Olson, S. L., Dietrich, D. L., Ruﬀ, G. A., Ferkul, P. V., and Johnston, M. C., “Prevention
of Over-Pressurization During Combustion in a Sealed Chamber,” 42nd International Conference on Environmental Systems,
No. to appear, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, San Diego, California, July 2012.
12 Gordon, S. and McBride, B. J., “Computer Program for Calculation of Complex Chemical Equilibrium Compositions
and Applications. I. Analysis,” NASA Reference Publication 1311, NASA John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio,
1994.
13 Custer, R. L. P. and Meacham, B. J., Introduction to Performance-Based Fire Safety, Society of Fire Protection Engineers
and National Fire Protection Association, 1997.
10 Lva,

11 of 11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

