63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

IAC-12. A2.2.2
LARGE SCALE EXPERIMENTS ON SPACECRAFT FIRE SAFETY
David L. Urban
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA

Gary A. Ruff
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA

Olivier Minster
ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands

A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA

Jose L. Torero
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Guillaume Legros
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France

Christian Eigenbrod
University of Bremen (ZARM), Bremen, Germany

Nickolay Smirnov
Moscow Lomonosov State University, Moscow, Russia

Osamu Fujita
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan

Adam J. Cowlard
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Sebastien Rouvreau
Belisama R&D, Toulouse, France

Balazs Toth
ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands

Grunde Jomaas
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

Full scale fire testing complemented by computer modelling has provided significant knowhow about the risk,
prevention and suppression of fire in terrestrial systems (cars, ships, planes, buildings, mines, and tunnels). In
comparison, no such testing has been carried out for manned spacecraft due to the complexity, cost and risk associated with operating a long duration fire safety experiment of a relevant size in microgravity. Therefore, there is
currently a gap in knowledge of fire behaviour in spacecraft. The entire body of low-gravity fire research has either
been conducted in short duration ground-based microgravity facilities or has been limited to very small fuel samples.
Still, the work conducted to date has shown that fire behaviour in low-gravity is very different from that in normalgravity, with differences observed for flammability limits, ignition delay, flame spread behaviour, flame colour and
flame structure. As a result, the prediction of the behaviour of fires in reduced gravity is at present not validated. To
address this gap in knowledge, a collaborative international project, Spacecraft Fire Safety, has been established
with its cornerstone being the development of an experiment (Fire Safety 1) to be conducted on an ISS resupply
vehicle, such as the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) or Orbital Cygnus after it leaves the ISS and before it enters
the atmosphere. A computer modelling effort will complement the experimental effort. Although the experiment
will need to meet rigorous safety requirements to ensure the carrier vehicle does not sustain damage, the absence of
a crew removes the need for strict containment of combustion products. This will facilitate the possibility of examining fire behaviour on a scale that is relevant to spacecraft fire safety and will provide unique data for fire model
validation. This unprecedented opportunity will expand the understanding of the fundamentals of fire behaviour in
spacecraft. The experiment is being developed by an international topical team that is collaboratively defining the
experiment requirements and performing supporting analysis, experimentation and technology development. This
paper presents the objectives, status and concept of this project.

IAC-12. A2.2.2

1

63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

order of magnitude larger than any prior flame spread
experiment and is consistent with the amount of flammable material likely to be in a spacecraft cabin. The
second objective is to develop an experiment that will
test the flammability limits of materials in low gravity.
Supported by the ground-based research by the topical
team, the experiment will address both of these objectives and will be discussed in subsequent sections.
Development of an experiment of this scale requires a
team with a broad range of skills. Not only do the
science and technology requirements for the experiment
need to be identified, they must be translated into
engineering requirements and then expanded to develop
engineering drawings and operation concepts for the
experiment. In this case, the project team must conduct
a trade study to identify vehicles suitable to conduct this
experiment.

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Despite decades of research into combustion and fire
processes in reduced gravity, there have been very few
experiments directly studying spacecraft fire safety
under low-gravity conditions. Furthermore, none of
these experiments have studied sample and environment
sizes typical of those expected in a spacecraft fire. [1]
Prior experiments have all been limited to samples no
larger than 10 cm in length and width. This stands in
stark contrast to all other habitable volumes on earth. In
all other cases, (e.g. mines, buildings, airplanes, ships)
the standards for fire safety for human occupied structures and vehicles are based upon testing conducted
with full-scale fires. The large differences between fire
behavior in normal and reduced gravity results in a lack
of an experimental data base forces spacecraft designers
to base their designs on terrestrial fires and fire standards. While this approach has been successful thus far,
there is inherent risk due to the level of uncertainty.
Despite their obvious importance, full scale spacecraft
fire experiments have not been possible in the past
because of the inherent hazards involved in conducting
a large fire test in a manned spacecraft. To address this
knowledge gap, an experiment was proposed that will
be conducted in an expendable spacecraft, enabling the
conduct of the experiment without risk to crew or a
needed spacecraft.
In October 2011 the NASA Advanced Exploration
Systems program funded a project to develop and
demonstrate spacecraft fire safety technologies in
relevant environments. The keystone of these demonstrations is a large-scale fire safety experiment (demonstration flight) conducted on an International Space
Station (ISS) re-supply vehicle after it has undocked
from the ISS and before it enters the atmosphere. The
AES project team is augmented by an international
topical team assembled by the European Space Agency
(ESA). This team is comprised by the authors of this
article. Each team member brings expertise and funding
from their respective space and research agencies. This
participation of members from other countries and space
agency not only brings additional skills to the science
team but also facilitates development of an international
approach to spacecraft fire prevention and response. No
single experiment can address the range of issues that
need to be resolved to fully understand the spacecraft
fire risk and to ensure the safety of future flights. The
goal of the topical team is to leverage the international
capabilities of the team to develop a suite of spacecraft
fire safety experiments that will be conducted on appropriate space platforms and to conduct parallel groundbased research [2] to expand the impact of the flight
experiments. The current experiment has been designed
to address two objectives. The first objective is the
development of a flame spread and growth experiment
of approximately 1 meter scale. This will be at least an

IAC-12. A2.2.2

SPACECRAFT FIRE SAFETY
DEMONSTRATION FLIGHT
Vehicle Trade Study
The candidate vehicles for this experiment include
any of the current or planned ISS resupply vehicles such
as the ATV, HTV, or Cygnus1. The Spacecraft Fire
Safety (SFS) Demonstration project team evaluated
various characteristics of these vehicles including:
Volume of the vehicle
Weight/Center of Gravity restrictions
Availability of on-board power
Availability of communication
Data downlink options
Experiment mounting options
Concept of operations
Command and control options
Allowable pressure rise
Possible experiment configuration
Availability of ground support
Launch schedule
The ATV and the Cygnus vehicle were carefully examined for this experiment. Based on schedule and
resource availability, the Cygnus vehicle was selected as
the most promising option for this experiment. 2 Early in
1

The SpaceX Dragon vehicle also will re-supply ISS but it is
recovered for re-use. Combustion products from this experiment would enter the vehicle and contaminate the contents
thereby complicating the recovery and refurbishment of the
vehicle.
2
In May 2012, funding and schedule concerns eliminated the
feasibility of conducting the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration experiment on ATV-5, the last planned ATV mission.
One or more experiments similar in concept to that discussed
in this paper are being planned for implementation on Orbital

2

63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

the development of the project, the European Space
Agency (ESA) became interested in this experiment. Dr.
Olivier Minster, Senior Physical Scientist in the Directorate of Human Spaceflight for the European Space
Agency formed an international topical team chaired by
Professor Grunde Jomaas (Technical University of
Denmark) and Professor Jose L. Torero (BRE
Trust/RAEng Chair in Fire Safety Engineering in the
School of Engineering at the University of Edinburgh).
This team consists of 14 researchers from the European,
Japanese, Russian, and U.S. spacecraft fire safety
communities and their task is to define research that
would be possible from such a low-gravity fire safety
experiment. This group has developed the initial science
and technology requirements for this experiment. The
experiment concept to be discussed in the next section is
based on a baseline configuration in the Cygnus vehicle.
The SFS Demonstration Project Team has had detailed
discussions with personnel from Orbital Sciences to
begin the definition of an interface between the experiment and the vehicle. A similar design concept could be
implemented in other vehicles.

Fans
Sample
Hex-Filter
Side Wall

Back Wall

Sample
Holder

Cameras

Light Bar
Igniter
Flow Straightening
Tubes

Fig. 1: Schematic of the flow of the Spacecraft Fire
Safety Demonstration Experiment. The duct is approximately 50- by 50- by 100-cm.

Experiment Concept
The concept for this experiment focuses on conducting two types of sold material combustion tests that
would be performed on different flights using the same
flow duct design. A schematic of the flow duct is shown
in Fig. 1 and the flow duct is shown installed in the
Cygnus vehicle in Fig. 2. The top and bottom structures
on the experiment module are the fan unit on the top
and the flow straightener unit on the bottom. The
airflow is from the bottom to the top of the experiment
module. It is expected that the flow duct will be a rigid
structure made with aluminum to enable it to be attached with the standard stowage straps. This duct will
ensure a more uniform flow across the samples, maintain a clear flow path within the experiment module, and
prevent burning debris from interacting with the rest of
the cargo.
The first test will investigate flame spread and growth
in low-gravity to determine if there is a limiting flame
size and to quantify the size and growth rate of flames
over large surfaces. The flame will propagate over a
panel of thin material approximately 0.3 m wide by 1.0 m
long, shown in Fig. 1. The ignition method would be a
hot wire along the upstream edge. This material will be
expected to burn at the anticipated cabin atmosphere. The
objective of this test is to quantify the flame development
over a large sample in low-gravity. This sample will be
more heavily instrumented with multi-view video,
thermocouples, and radiometers so that the data can be
used to verify numerical simulations of fire spread and
development in low-g.

IAC-12. A2.2.2

Clear Front Cover
(Lexan)

Fig. 2: Experiment Module for the Spacecraft Fire
Safety Demonstration shown installed in the Cygnus
vehicle. The other objects are standard cargo bags.
Additional diagnostics to be included in the flow
straightener and fan units include oxygen sensors,
thermocouples, and CO and CO2 sensors. In addition to
filtering particulate, the filter unit could contain the CO
sorbent materials developed for post fire cleanup.
The objective of the second set of tests is to investigate the low-gravity Maximum Oxygen Concentration
(MOC) flammability limits in long-term low gravity [3].
The configuration for these experiments consists of six
to nine samples of varying materials (denoted flammability samples) each having dimensions of approximately 5 cm wide by 30 cm long installed on the same panel
in place of the single sample in Fig. 1. These samples
emulate the configuration used in NASA-STD-6001

3

63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

Test 1 [4]. Each sample is ignited at the bottom using a
hot wire. The oxygen concentration in the vehicle will
be nearly 21% by volume the same as in the ISS when
the hatch was closed. The materials would be selected to
be near their normal-gravity or hypothesized lowgravity maximum oxygen concentration in 21% O2.
This complicates the selection of sample materials
because most materials relevant for spacecraft do not
have normal-gravity flammability limits near 21%
oxygen by volume. [5-7] Camera images would be the
primary diagnostics for these tests as the intended result
is primarily to determine whether the flame propagates
or self-extinguishes.
Sample Selection
Identifying samples that have flammability limits in
the vicinity of 21% oxygen by volume is not trivial. An
additional consideration is that re-entry vehicles, in
general, are designed to operate within a rather narrow
pressure range. Increasing the internal pressure due to
the heat release from a combustion event would trigger
the opening of a pressure relief valve. Depending on the
vehicle design, this may or may not be acceptable as a
planned experiment operation. Therefore, this experiment is potentially constrained both by the required
flammability limit of the fuel as well as the rate of heat
release. Current plans are to constrain the experiment to
thin materials that burn in air and will cross over to
being non-flammable with limited increase in the
sample thickness.
Given the volume of a closed chamber, the heat release created by the combustion of a known mass of fuel
is a simple calculation. The complication in determining
the pressure rise is that the time history of the pressure
rise depends on the balance between the heat release
rate of the combustion process and the rate of heat
transfer to the cargo and vehicle structure. A transient
analysis of this phenomenon can be developed but a
detailed verification of this model is required. Experiments have been conducted in a large chamber at NASA
GRC in which full-scale samples for the SFS Demonstration experiment can be burned and the rise in gas
temperature and pressure rise measured. The chamber
Vacuum Faculty (VF)-13 (Fig. 3) has a 149.9 cm inner
diameter, and a height of 360 cm, yielding a total
volume of 6.35 m3. It has a removable steel cap that is
252.1 cm tall. An experimental rack was fabricated to fit
into the chamber to support the sample frames (Fig. 4).
These sample frames were designed to hold different
size samples to facilitate variation of the heat release
rate. The frame shown in Fig. 4 could either have the
four sample sections ignited simultaneously or sequentially.

Fig. 3: VF 13 test chamber used
for pressure rise experiments.

Fig. 4: Experimental Rack in VF13.

IAC-12. A2.2.2

4

63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

Fig. 6: Fluent model calculation of velocity magnitude
in ATV configuration after 1 minute of heat release.
Fig. 5: VF13Experimental pressure curve for a single
12.5- by 100-cm sample ignited at the top. The fuel
is 90 grade cotton cheese-cloth with a 4.92 mg/cm2
density.

CONCLUSION
Predicting the end state of an unconstrained fire in a
spacecraf
methods are probably the areas of greatest uncertainty in
our effort to ensure the fire safety of future spacecraft.
These questions are being address by a material flammability experiment that can be conducted on an ISS
resupply vehicle after it has undocked from the ISS and
before it reenters the atmosphere. This provides a
habitable pressurized environment of considerable size
without the hazards associated with a manned vehicle.
Exploitation of this opportunity would enable study of
practical low-g material flammability phenomena that
are important for spacecraft design yet cannot be studied
in ISS facilities or other orbital platforms. This experi-

Data from these tests are being used to develop and
validate models to identify the relevant heat transfer
mechanisms and verify code predictions. Fig. 5 contains
a typical pressure rise curve. After it is validated against
the VF-13 data, the models will then be applied to the
experiment in the re-entry vehicle to predict the transient pressure rise and plan the sequence of the experiment. Two models are being developed, a stirred reactor
model and a three dimensional numerical model using
FluentTM. The stirred reactor model [8] accounts for the
energy gain and loss mechanisms that occur during the
combustion process. A transient energy balance includes the energy gain due to the burning rate and the
associated energy release rate for a typical fuel material
to be identified. The energy losses are due to heat
transfer by radiation from the flame to the vehicle walls,
by convection from the heated gases (which expand as
well as are convected) to the vehicle walls, and by
conduction from the flame to the fuel-sample holder.
The model has successfully predicted results with a
smaller sample in a smaller chamber [7] and is being
transitioned to reproduce the results in VF-13.
The Fluent model is being developed with the following assumptions: Ke-RNG turbulence model, ideal
gas for density calculation, Sutherland model for viscosity, closed volume, constant heat release rate for duration needed to achieve the total heat release, 2.2 million
cells. The model has been developed and tested for an
adiabatic case (Fig. 6). In the next phases radiative and
convective heat losses to the vehicle boundaries will be
considered.

IAC-12. A2.2.2

with the Cygnus
as the current base-line carrier. Because of the early
interaction with ESA, an international topical team has
been formed to develop concepts for that experiment
and work towards its implementation. An experimental
concept is being developed that will investigate oxygen
flammability limits and flame spread over a large fuel
sample in a long-term low gravity environment. Additional tasks in the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration
Project are being conducted to identify sample materials
and verify the predictions of pressure rise in the re-entry
vehicle during the experiment. Perhaps the largest
challenge is obtaining the proper alignment of resources
(both monetary and workforce) and schedule to allow
the experiment to be performed within the operating
constraints set by the AES Program Office. Nevertheless, this experiment would be a landmark for spacecraft
fire safety with the data and subsequent analysis providing much needed verifications of spacecraft fire safety
protocol for the crews of future exploration vehicles and
habitats.

5

63rd International Astronautical Congress 2012, Naples, Italy. Copyright ©2012 by the International Astronautical Federation. All rights reserved.
One or more authors of this work are employees of the government of the Unites States, which may preclude the work from being subject to
copyright in Unites States, in which event no copyright is asserted in that country.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support of the various space and research agencies that have supported
this work including but not limited to: JAXA, ESA,
RSA, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, and the
Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration Project of the
NASA Advanced Exploration Systems Program.
REFERENCES
1. Ruff, G.A., Urban, D.L., Pedley, M.D., Johnson,
P.T., Safety Design for Space Systems edited by
Gary Musgrave et al. Chapter 27
Elsevier, 2009.
2. Legros, G., FernandezTorero, J. L., Eigenbrod, C., Smirnov, N., Jomaas,
G., Cowlard, A.J., Microgravity Flammability Experiments for Spacecraft Fire Safety 63rd International Astronautical Congress, Naples, Italy,
October 2012
3. Hirsch, D.B., Williams, J.H., Haas, J.P., Beeson,
en Concentration
Flammability Thresholds of Selected Aerospace
Materials Considered for the Constellation Prond
IAASS Conference,
Chicago, May 14-16, 2007; (also ESA SP-645, July
2007).
4. National Aeronautics and Space Administration

5.

6.

7.

8.

Offgassing, and Compatibility Requirements and

IAC-12. A2.2.2

6

Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That
Support Combustion 2008.
Hirsch, D.B., Williams, J.H., Harper, S.A., Beeson,
H.D., Ruff, G.A., and Pedley, M.D., Pressure Effects on the Self-Extinguishment Limits of Aerospace Materials Paper No. 2009-01-2490, 39th
International Conference on Environmental Systems, Savannah, GA, July 12-16, 2009.
Olson, S.L., Ruff, G.A., Miller, F.J., Microgravity
Flame Spread in Exploration Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen, and Velocity Effects on Opposed and
-012005, 38th International Conference on Environmental Systems, San Francisco, CA, June 29-July
2, 2008.
Olson, S.L., Hirsch,
mproving Materials Flammability Screening For
Technical Meeting of the Central States Section of
the Combustion Institute, Champaign, Illinois,
March 2010.
Gokoglu, S.A., Niehaus, J.E., Olson, S.L., Dietrich,
D.L., Ruff, G.A., Ferkul, P.V., Johnston, M.C.
Prevention of Over-Pressurization During Combustion in a Sealed Chamber, 42nd International
Conference on Environmental Systems (ICES), San
Diego, CA, July 16-19, 2012.

