ABSTRACT
Practical Application of PRA as an Integrated Design Tool for Space Systems
By: Prince Kalia, Ying Shi, Robin Pair, Virginia Quaney and John Uhlenbrock
This paper presents the application of the first comprehensive Probabilistic Risk Assessment
(PRA) during the design phase of a joint NASAlNOAA weather satellite program, Geostationary
Operational Environmental Satellite Series R (GOES-R). GOES-R is the next generation weather
satellite primarily to help understand the weather and help save human lives. PRA has been used
at NASA for Human Space Flight for many years. PRA was initially adopted and implemented
in the operational phase of manned space flight programs and more recently for the next
generation human space systems. Since its first use at NASA, PRA has become recognized
throughout the Agency as a method of assessing complex mission risks as part of an overall
approach to assuring safety and mission success throughout project lifecycles. PRA is now
included as a requirement during the design phase of both NASA next generation manned space
vehicles as well as for high priority robotic missions. The influence of PRA on GOES-R design
and operation concepts are discussed in detail.
The GOES-R PRA is unique at NASA for its early implementation. It also represents a
pioneering effort to integrate risks from both Spacecraft (SC) and Ground Segment (GS) to fully
assess the probability of achieving mission objectives. PRA analysts were actively involved in
system engineering and design engineering to ensure that a comprehensive set of technical risks
were correctly identified and properly understood from a design and operations perspective. The
analysis included an assessment of SC hardware and software, SC fault management system, GS
hardware and software, common cause failures, human error, natural hazards, solar weather and
infrastructure (such as network and telecommunications failures, fire).
PRA findings directly resulted in design changes to reduce SC risk from micro-meteoroids. PRA
results also led to design changes in several SC subsystems, e.g. propulsion, guidance, navigation
and control (GNC), communications, mechanisms, and command and data handling (C&DH).
The fault tree approach assisted in the development of the fault management system design.
Human error analysis, which examined human response to failure, indicated areas where
automation could reduce the overall probability of gaps in operation by half. In addition, the
PRA brought to light many potential root causes of system disruptions, including earthquakes,
inclement weather, solar storms, blackouts and other extreme conditions not considered in the
typical reliability and availability analyses. Ultimately the PRA served to identify potential
failures that, when mitigated, resulted in a more robust design, as well as to influence the
program's concept of operations. The early and active integration ofPRA with system and
design engineering provided a well-managed approach for risk assessment that increased
reliability and availability, optimized lifecyc1e costs, and unified the SC and GS developments.

International Journal of Perform-ability Engineering (IJPE) on Space Vehicle Performance Assessments
Page 1

