43rd International Conference on Environmental Systems
July 14-18, 2013, Vail, CO

AIAA 2013-3410

Development of Large-Scale
Spacecraft Fire Safety Experiments
Gary A. Ruff 1 and David L. Urban2
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello3
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
James S. T’ien 4
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

Jose L. Torero5
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Guillaume Legros6
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
Christian Eigenbrod7
University of Bremen (ZARM), Bremen, Germany
Nickolay Smirnov8
Moscow Lomonosov State University, Moscow, Russia
Osamu Fujita9
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
Adam J. Cowlard10
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Sebastien Rouvreau11
Belisama R&D, Toulouse, France
Olivier Minster12 and Balazs Toth13
ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands
Grunde Jomaas14
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
1

Physical Scientist, Space Technology Office, 21000 Brookpark Road, MS 77-7, Associate Fellow
Branch Chief, Combustion and Reacting Systems Branch, 21000 Brookpark Road, MS 77-5, Associate Fellow.
3
Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Etcheverry Hall, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
4
Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Glennan Bldg, Cleveland, OH
5
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
6
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
7
University of Bremen (ZARM), Bremen, Germany
8
Moscow Lomonosov State University, Moscow, Russia
9
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
10
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
11
Belisama R&D, Toulouse, France
12
ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands
13
ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands
14
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

The status is presented of a spacecraft fire safety research project that is being developed
to reduce the uncertainty and risk in the design of spacecraft fire safety systems by testing at
nearly full scale in low-gravity. Future crewed missions are expected to be longer in duration
than previous exploration missions outside of low-earth orbit and accordingly, more
complex in terms of operations, logistics, and safety. This will increase the challenge of
ensuring a fire-safe environment for the crew throughout the mission. Based on our
fundamental uncertainty of the behavior of fires in low-gravity, the need for realistic scale
testing at reduced gravity has been demonstrated. To address this knowledge gap, the
NASA Advanced Exploration Systems Program Office in the Human Exploration and
Operations Mission Directorate has established a project with the goal of substantially
advancing our understanding of the spacecraft fire safety risk. The activity of this project is
supported by an international topical team of fire experts from other space agencies who
conduct research that is integrated into the overall experiment design.
The large-scale space flight experiment will be conducted in an Orbital Sciences
Corporation Cygnus vehicle after it has deberthed from the ISS. Although the experiment
will need to meet rigorous safety requirements to ensure the carrier vehicle does not sustain
damage, the absence of a crew removes the need for strict containment of combustion
products. The tests will be fully automated with the data downlinked at the conclusion of the
test before the Cygnus vehicle reenters the atmosphere. Several computer modeling and
ground-based experiment efforts will complement the flight experiment effort. The
international topical team is collaborating with the NASA team in the definition of the
experiment requirements and performing supporting analysis, experimentation and
technology development. The status of the overall experiment and the associated
international technology development efforts are summarized.

Nomenclature
AES
ATV
ESA
GRC
HTV
ISS
JAXA
OSC
UPMC

D

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

Advanced Exploration Systems
Automated Transfer Vehicle
European Space Agency
John. H. Glenn Research Center
H-II Transfer Vehicle
International Space Station
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
Orbital Sciences Corporation
Université Pierre et Marie Curie

I. Introduction

espite decades of research into combustion and fire processes in reduced gravity, there have been very few
experiments directly studying spacecraft fire safety under low-gravity conditions. Furthermore, none of these
experiments have studied sample and environment sizes typical of those expected in a spacecraft fire.1 Prior
experiments have been limited to samples no larger than 10 cm in length and width. This stands in stark contrast to
the full-scale fire safety testing that has been conducted in habitable structures on earth including mines, buildings,
airplanes, ships, etc. The large differences between fire behavior in normal and reduced gravity results in a lack of
experimental datathat forces spacecraft designers to base their designs on terrestrial fires and fire standards. While
this approach has been successful thus far, there is inherent risk due to the level of uncertainty. Despite their obvious
importance, full scale spacecraft fire experiments have not been possible because of the inherent hazards involved in
conducting a large fire test in a manned spacecraft. To address this knowledge gap, an experiment was proposed that
will be conducted in an expendable spacecraft, enabling such an experiment to be conducted without risk to crew or
crewed spacecraft.
In October 2011 the NASA Advanced Exploration Systems program funded a project to develop and
demonstrate spacecraft fire safety technologies in relevant environments. The keystone of these demonstrations is a
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

large-scale fire safety experiment conducted on an International Space Station (ISS) re-supply vehicle after it has
undocked from the ISS and before it enters the atmosphere. The project team from NASA John H. Glenn Research
Center (GRC) is augmented by an international topical team assembled by the European Space Agency (ESA). Each
member of this team (the authors of this article) brings expertise and funding from their respective space and
research agencies for their activities. This participation of members from other countries and space agencies not only
brings additional skills to the science team but also facilitates international cooperation in the development of an
approach to spacecraft fire prevention and response for future exploration vehicles. No single experiment can
address the range of issues that need to be resolved to fully understand the spacecraft fire risk and to ensure the
safety of future flights. The goal of the topical team is to leverage the international capabilities of the team to
develop a suite of ground-based and space flight spacecraft fire safety experiments to expand the impact of the flight
experiments. The current experiment has been designed to address two objectives. The first objective is to
understand the flame spread and growth of a fire over an amount of flammable material consistent with what is
likely to be in a spacecraft cabin through the development of an experiment for a sample material approximately 1
meter long. This will be at least an order of magnitude larger than any prior low-g flame spread experiment. The
second objective is to examine the flammability limits of materials in low gravity to determine if NASA’s material
selection methods are a reasonable predictor of low-gravity flammability. Supported by the ground-based research
by the topical team, the experiment will address both of these objectives. Their individual contributions will be
discussed in subsequent sections.

II. Background and Early Formulation
The unique objectives of this experiment necessitated the use of an ISS expendable resupply vehicle such as
ESA’s ATV, JAXA’s HTV, or Orbital Sciences Corporation’s (Orbital’s) Cygnus vehicles. Early in the development
of the project, the European Space Agency (ESA) became interested in this experiment. As a result, the ATV was
the initial vehicle for which an experiment concept was developed. Dr. Olivier Minster, Senior Physical Scientist in
the Directorate of Human Spaceflight for the European Space Agency formed an international topical team chaired
by Professor Grunde Jomaas (Technical University of Denmark) and Professor Jose L. Torero (BRE Trust/RAEng
Chair in Fire Safety Engineering in the School of Engineering at the University of Edinburgh)¥. This Fire Safety in
Space International Topical Team consists of 14 researchers from the European, Japanese, Russian, and U.S.
spacecraft fire safety communities and is tasked to define research that would be possible from such a low-gravity
fire safety experiment. The group has developed the initial science and technology requirements for this experiment
as well as ground-based experiments and modeling efforts that support this experimental campaign.
While many factors could go into the selection of a vehicle such as available volume, power availability,
communication, etc., the schedule and resources were eventually the most significant. With the planned ATV flights
ending with ATV-5 in March 2014, it became unlikely that an experiment could be developed and integrated with
the vehicle within that schedule. Since Orbital’s eight Cygnus flights were planned to begin in 2013 and extend
through 2016, Cygnus was a more promising vehicle for the successful completion of this experiment.
Programmatic requirements later drove the project to plan for three experiments to be performed on three
consecutive flights of Cygnus. The first experiment would take place on the 5th Cygnus flight currently planned for
February 2015.

III. Experiment Concept
The concept for this experiment focuses on conducting two types of material combustion tests that will be
performed on different flights using the flow duct design. The experiment package consists of a flow duct and an
adjacent avionics bay. A schematic of the flow duct is shown in Fig. 1. The avionics bay is connected to the side of
the flow duct as shown in the figure. The top and bottom structures on the experiment module are the fan unit on the
top and the flow straightener unit on the bottom. The airflow is from the bottom to the top of the experiment module.
The flow duct/avionics bay assembly is a rigid structure and will be secured with the standard stowage straps. This
duct will enable a more uniform flow across the samples, maintain a clear flow path within the experiment module,
and prevent burning debris from interacting with the rest of the cargo. The experiment package is shown installed in
the Cygnus vehicle in Fig. 2.

¥

Professor Torero is now at the University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Fans

Power
Management

Sample card
(flame spread
sample shown)

Cameras

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

Flow Duct

Avionics Bay
USB Hub

Flow
straightener

Signal
conditioning card

Air flow

Figure 1: Schematic of the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration Experiment.
The experiment module consists of a flow duct containing the sample card and an
avionics bay. All power, computer, and data acquisition modules are contained in
the bay. The experiment module is approximately 53- by 90- by 133-cm.

Figure 2: Experiment Module for the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration
shown installed in the Cygnus vehicle. The other objects are standard cargo
bags.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

The experiment package will have a range of diagnostics to monitor the test conditions. The ambient temperature
and the oxygen and CO2 concentrations will be measured at the intake of the flow duct with temperature
measurements also made just upstream of the fans. A pressure transducer will also deliver the pressure time-history.
Flow anemometers will be placed at selected locations in the inlet flow and thereby quantify the oxidizer flux in the
duct. Two video cameras will provide top views of the entire sample. The sample will also be periodically
illuminated by a LED source to allow the measurement of the pyrolysis length.
For the flame spread sample, the flame stand-off distance will be measured using several thermocouples placed
at varying heights above the sample surface. These will be woven into the sample and then bent so they are
perpendicular to the surface. Finally, a calibrated radiometer will measure the broadband radiative emission from the
sample to provide an estimate of the radiative flux from the burning zone towards the surroundings.
The first test will investigate flame spread and growth in low-gravity to determine if there is a limiting flame size
and to quantify the size and growth rate of flames over large surfaces. The flame will propagate over a panel of thin
material approximately 0.4 m wide by 1.0 m long, shown in Fig. 1. The ignition method will be a hot wire along the
upstream edge. This material will be expected to burn at the anticipated cabin atmosphere. The objective of this test
is to quantify the flame development over a large sample in low-gravity. The objective of the second set of tests is to
investigate the low-gravity Maximum Oxygen Concentration (MOC) flammability limits in long-term low gravity.2
The configuration for these experiments consists of nine samples of varying materials (denoted flammability
samples) each having dimensions of approximately 5 cm wide by 30 cm long installed on the same panel in place of
the single sample in Fig. 1. These samples emulate the configuration used in NASA-STD-6001 Test 1.3 Each sample
is ignited at the bottom using a hot wire. The oxygen concentration in the vehicle will be nearly 21% by volume—
the same as in the ISS when the hatch was closed. The materials would be selected to be near their normal-gravity or
hypothesized low-gravity maximum oxygen concentration in 21% O2. This complicates the selection of sample
materials because most materials relevant for spacecraft do not have normal-gravity flammability limits near 21%
oxygen by volume.4-6 Camera images would be the primary diagnostics for these tests as the intended result is
primarily to determine whether the flame propagates or self-extinguishes.
A. Sample Selection and Pressure Control
Identifying samples that have flammability limits in the
vicinity of 21% oxygen by volume is not trivial, making
the selection of the sample materials a major project
activity. An additional consideration is that re-entry
vehicles, in general, are designed to operate within a rather
narrow pressure range. Increasing the internal pressure due
to the heat release from a combustion event could trigger
the opening of a pressure relief valve. Depending on the
vehicle design, this may not be acceptable as a planned
experiment operation. Therefore, this experiment is
potentially constrained both by the required flammability
limit of the fuel as well as the rate of heat release. Current
plans are to constrain the experiment to thin materials that
burn in air and will cross over to being non-flammable
with limited increase in the sample thickness.
Given the volume of a closed chamber, the heat release
created by the combustion of a known mass of fuel is a
simple calculation. The complication in determining the
pressure rise is that its time history depends on the balance
between the heat release rate from the combustion process
and the rate of heat transfer to the cargo and vehicle
structure. A transient analysis of this phenomenon can be
developed but a detailed verification of this model is
required. Experiments have been conducted in a large
Figure 3: VF-13 test chamber used for pressure
chamber at NASA GRC in which full-scale samples for the
rise experiments.
SFS Demonstration experiment can be burned and the rise
in gas temperature and pressure rise measured. The
chamber, Vacuum Faculty (VF)-13, (Fig. 3) has a 149.9 cm inner diameter, and a height of 360 cm, yielding a total
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

volume of 6.35 m3. It has a removable steel cap that is
252.1 cm tall. An experimental rack was fabricated to fit
into the chamber to support the sample frames (Fig. 4).
These sample frames were designed to hold different
size samples to facilitate variation of the heat release
rate. The frame shown in Fig. 4 could either have the
four sample sections ignited simultaneously or
sequentially.
Data from these tests are being used to develop and
validate models to identify the relevant heat transfer
mechanisms and verify code predictions. Fig. 5 contains
a typical pressure rise curve obtained from these tests.
After the models are validated against the VF-13 data,
they will then be applied to the experiment in the reentry vehicle to predict the transient pressure rise and
plan the sequence of the experiment. Two models are
being developed, a stirred reactor model and a three
dimensional numerical model using FluentTM. The
stirred reactor model7 accounts for the energy gain and
loss mechanisms that occur during the combustion
process. A transient energy balance includes the energy
gain due to the burning rate and the associated energy
release rate for a typical fuel material . The energy
losses are due to heat transfer by radiation from the
flame to the vehicle walls, by convection from the
Figure 4: Experimental Rack in VF-13.
heated gases (which expand as well as are convected) to
the vehicle walls, and by conduction from the flame to
the fuel-sample holder. The model has successfully predicted results with a smaller sample in a smaller chamber6
and is being transitioned to reproduce the results in VF-13.
The Fluent model is being developed with the following assumptions: Ke-RNG turbulence model, ideal gas for
density calculation, Sutherland model for viscosity, closed volume, constant heat release rate for duration needed to
achieve the total heat release, 2.2 million cells. The model has been developed and tested for an adiabatic case (Fig.
6). In the next phases radiative and convective heat losses to the vehicle boundaries will be considered.

IV. Ground-based supporting research
A. Theoretical underpinnings
1. Scenario for a fire inside a spacecraft
Figure 7 is a schematic of a flame established over a
flat fuel plate and propagating in the same direction as
that of the oxidizer flow (concurrent flame spread). In
the absence of gravity, the hot reacting gases and the
gaesous and particulate combustion products produced
inside the flame are transported downstream towards the
pyrolysis front by forced convection. As they are
convected downstream, they enhance the heat transfer to
the unburned material and consequently the flame
spread. The resulting concurrent flame spread process
can be very rapid and hazardous, and consequently is
considered as a possible worst-case scenario for flame
Figure 5: VF13 Experimental pressure curve
spread.8
for a single 12.5- by 100-cm sample ignited at
While the entire flame influences the rate of the
the top. The fuel is 90 grade cotton cheese-cloth
concurrent flame spread, the spread of an opposed flame
with a 4.92 mg/cm2 density.
is mainly controlled by the flame stabilization process.
Therefore, for a given geometrical configuration, a longer time is needed to reach steady state for concurrent flame
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

spread, as compared with opposed flame spread.9
Moreover, due to the longer flame lengths in
concurrent spread, reduced scale experiments
always require a longer flow tunnel. Given these
limitations, it is impractical to routinely test all
spacecraft materials in orbiting conditions and
ground-based low gravity testing is too brief to test
all but the thinnest materials. Therefore, material
testing can be conducted in microgravity only for a
very limited number of materials. By comparing the
low-gravity data with those obtained in groundbased tests using similar materials, it is possible to
interpret the relevance of the normal-gravity data to
low-gravity behavior for most materials.
Specifically, the configuration of NASA-STD-6001
Fig. 6: Fluent model calculation of velocity magnitude
Test 13 allows translation of the data obtained in
in ATV configuration after 1 minute of heat release.
normal gravity to microgravity. As an illustration,
the adiabatic B number extracted from the upward
spread taking place along a NASA Test 1 sample at normal gravity is shown to govern the worst-case scenario of a
concurrent flame spread in microgravity.10 For these reasons, it is expected that experiments investigating
concurrent flame spread in microgravity and conducted at real time and length scales will lead to significant insights
into the understanding and modeling of fire spread in a manned spacecraft.
2. Governing parameters of the concurrent flame spread over thermally thin materials
Both streamwise and perpendicular conduction and diffusion are important to concurrent flame spread.9 Flame
spread over thermally thick materials in microgravity is documented in the literature.11 However, numerical
simulations require some experimental simplifications, such as a thermally thin configuration, to make the
simulations tractable. The large-scale experiment being developed only increases the need for simplifications
because the large computational volume requires many computational nodes for adequate resolution.
Application of these models to the evaluation of spacecraft fires requires that the detailed physical phenomena be
well-understood. For example, three length scales characterize the concurrent flame spread over a thermally thin
material:9 as illustrated in Fig. 7, these are the characteristic dimension (ls) of the stabilization zone (located in the
upstream region of the flame), the preheat characteristic length (lh) (spreading over the downstream region of the
flame), and the characteristic length (lP) of the pyrolysis area (in-between the former two). The characteristic
dimension ls is of the order of magnitude of α/UR, where α is the average thermal diffusivity of the gas and UR the
relative velocity between the incoming flow and the flame base. The other two characteristic length scales lP and lh
are of the same order of magnitude and are
approximately proportional to UR. According to
these dependencies, the latter two length scales
decrease in the low speed flows encountered in
microgravity while ls increases. As a result, the
stabilization zone can become a significant portion of
the overall flame length, affecting its shape and
structure, and therefore its spread rate. A competing
mechanism, however, is that at a given fuel flow rate
through a given pyrolysis area, decreasing UR lowers
soot production into the flame.12 This in turn can
decrease the optical thickness and thus reduce the
radiative heat feedback from the flame to the sample.
Depending on the length of the sample, this trend
may induce an increase in lh, and is may therefore
accelerate the flame spread. These opposite, though
Figure 7: Schematic for a concurrent spread over the
expected, trends underline the need for the large
flat surface of a solid combustible (extracted from Ref.
scale low-gravity experiment being developed. The
8).
parameters to be evaluated in these experiments
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

should be carefully selected based on the above considerations.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

B. Sample Selection
As previously stated, the long-term relevance of this experiment to spacecraft fire safety applications depends on
the careful and well-informed selection of the sample materials to be burned. The Fire Safety in Space international
topical team is involved in many aspects of this effort. The following sections outline their involvement in the
sample selection.
1. University of California - Berkeley
Current studies led by UC Berkeley focus on the changes in the flame spread behavior of two different fabrics in
environments subject to different oxygen concentrations, external radiant fluxes, oxidizer flow velocity, and fabric
density. All these factors play an important role in the selection of samples for the large-scale experiment described
in this paper. Furthermore, in realistic spacecraft fire scenarios, an external heat flux could be present. The addition
of an external radiant flux is able to extend the limits where flame spread may be observed effectively, resulting in
an increase of the flammability of the fabrics.
The experimental apparatus used in this investigation consists of a small-scale, horizontally mounted combustion
wind tunnel that is 560mm long with a rectangular cross-section 127mm by 100mm.The floor of the tunnel consists
of a 3.2mm aluminum plate covered by a
1.6mm ceramic insulation sheet. The bottom
surface of the tunnel has a 50.8mm by
152.4mm rectangular cut-out located
158.8mm from the inlet section of the
tunnel. The sidewalls of the tunnel are made
of 6mm quartz windows for optical access,
and the top surface of the tunnel is fitted
with two parabolic radiant heaters. Test
samples are pinched to the rectangular cutout section and there is a 6mm gap between
the back surface of the fabric and an
insulating panel that prevents air entrainment
from underneath.
Two cotton based fabrics labeled Fabric
1 and Fabric 2 with densities of 3 mg/cm2
O concentration (volume %)
and 5 mg/cm2, respectively, were used to
Figure 8: Minimum external radiative heat flux qmin
investigate the density influence on flame
enabling the flame spread over fabrics of different
spread behavior of a thermally thin material.
density as a function of O2 content in the oxidizer flow
2
Experimental results for the 6 mg/cm fabric
(oxidizer flow velocity: 0.1 m/s).
is presented in Figure 8 where it is seen that
at oxygen concentrations at or above 17% there is no need for an external radiant flux for concurrent flame spread to
take place. When the oxygen concentration is further reduced, an external radiant flux is required to observe flame
propagation. A pyrolysis front was consistently observed, even after the flame was extinguished in the flame
propagation experiments. The value of the minimum external radiant flux (q′′MIN), for the cotton based fabrics was
calculated using the distance at which the pyrolysis front stopped propagating. From the observed results, fabric
density plays a minor role in the value of q′′MIN with greater densities corresponding to larger values of external
radiant flux for concurrent flame spread. Further experiments with different fabric densities are needed to verify the
observed results.
This experiment will help quantify the impacts of oxygen concentration and ambient pressure on the material
flammability limits as well as help to interpret those limits for practical spacecraft applications where an external
heat flux is likely to be present.
2. UPMC
Figure 9(a) shows an experimental setup located at UPMC. Following the above considerations, the dimensions
of the sample to be ignited are 1 m x 0.5 m and correspond to the order of magnitude of the inner dimensions of a
manned spacecraft, and therefore to a real scale fire in such a vehicle. The sample holder is made of aluminum
panels, enabling the adjustment of both width and height of the sample.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

Figure 9(b) is a frame extracted from a
recording of the early flame growth over a
thermally thin sample. The glowing tungsten
wire that induces the sample ignition can be
seen. A power supply allows the control of the
electrical power dissipated into the wire, and
therefore of the heat flux imposed at the bottom
of the sample. The rig developed at UPMC in
collaboration with all the authors of the present
paper will be used to assess the flammability of
materials at normal gravity from tests performed
on samples with the actual dimensions of the
samples selected to be integrated into the
validation experiments in microgravity.
3. Hokkaido University
Current work is led by Prof Fujita at
Figure 9: (a) Sample holder for normal gravity
Hokkaido University and investigates flame
experiments of upward flame spread on a vertical
spread on overloaded electrical wires.13 As an
sample. (b) Flame growth on a thermally thin sample.
illustration, polyethylene insulated wires were
selected as test samples to evaluate their
flammability. Figure 10 shows a conceptual description of the flammability domains -as defined by the shaded areas
-of these wire in terms of O2 concentration and electric current. Thus, the “material flammability map” is clearly
modified by the microgravity facility used. The ignition limit is known to be extended in microgravity but
determining the actual lowest limit by the ground-based microgravity facility is not straight forward and also
requires a database delivered by long term
experiments, such as the ones scheduled inside the
KIBO facility onboard the ISS.
4. Bremen
Further efforts led by the University of Bremen
focus on the effect a surface structure other than the
G
G
G
standardized flat surface might have on flame
Region
Region
Region
propagation or flammability limits. As materials
2
3
1
relevant to spacecraft often appear in structured
constructions rather than an idealized flat surface,
the results from these tests will help to interpret the
results of the flight experiment to a broader range
of material configurations. Furthermore, the results
can be compared to those from flat sample tests and
thereby assess the capability of the numerical
simulations. Figure 11 shows a set of PMMAsamples of different thickness and with
implemented grooves that are either parallel to the
flame propagation direction (left) or perpendicular
Figure 10: Ignition map of overloaded wire.
to this direction (right). For the parallel case, the
Region 1: Ignition limit in 1-g.
hypothesis is that burning surfaces facing each
Region 2: Ignition limit in short-term µg tests.
other might promote flame propagation as
Region 3: Ignition limit in long-term µg tests.
compared to flat samples through its additional
Region 4: Ignition but no sustained flame.
heating contribution through radiation. For the
perpendicular case, grooves split the propagation
length into shorter sections and the flame partially propagating into the groove might be better stabilized than on a
flat surface. This might lead to a slower propagation, but, on the other hand, it might lead to more complete
consumption of the combustible material. All of these effects are important considerations in using the data from the
space flight experiment to develop a spacecraft fire safety strategy.
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

C. Modeling
Because both streamwise and perpendicular
conduction/diffusion are important in the flame
stabilization zone, the partial differential equations
governing concurrent flame spread are elliptical in
nature. As a result, the full Navier-Stokes system is
usually required and the high non-linearity of the
system of equations then requires numerical solution.9
Past modeling efforts at Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) on concurrent flame spreading
have been mostly on steady spread over thin solids. A
schematic of the flame configuration studied is shown
in Fig. 12. Steady flame spread takes place when the
flame has reached a limiting length and the spread rate
Figure 11. PMMA-samples shaped at University of
becomes constant. This type of model bypasses the
Bremen with grooves parallel or perpendicular to
initial flame growth period and is capable of studying
the flame propagation direction.
the extinction limits.11 However, these models do not
reveal the ignition transient and the flame growth details, which may be affected by the characteristic length of the
test specimen. For wide (or thick) solid samples, the flame growth period can be long in concurrent flow, which
means that a transient model will be necessary.
Tseng has recently conducted a transient three-dimensional direct numerical simulation of ignition leading to
flame growth in normal gravity.14 The major difficulty in such a direct numerical simulation consists in resolving the
flame stabilization zone that controls flame extinction. Consequently, the number of spatial grids is increased and
the computation becomes expensive. Currently, researchers at CWRU are focusing on flame growth in purely forced
flow in microgravity using direct numerical simulation. The objectives are to determine the entire flame growth
history, the effect of sample width, flow velocity, pressure and oxygen percentage. Data acquired from the largescale experiment will be especially crucial to confront the numerical trends induced by the sample's characteristic
length.
To forecast results of fire spread in an actual
spacecraft environment, it is essential to extend the
capability of the numerical flame-spread models. The
models should be able to predict ignition, growth and
spread in a strongly encumbered space containing
composite materials that have combustible and heat
conducting components. The mathematical model for
such a fire scenario has to take into account the presence
of at least three different phases, which cannot be merged
by averaging. More specifically, the gaseous phase is
needed for providing convective supply of an oxidant, the
solid phase is needed for providing the supply rate of
fuel, and the inert solid phase is needed as a sink, or
source, or transmitter of thermal energy. The complex
environment incorporating multiplicity of different
objects can preclude precise tracing of boundaries and,
instead, requires the use of more recent concepts, such as
the concept of quasi-permeable bodies developed at
Moscow Lomonosov State University.15 Within the frame
of this concept, all the phases are present in the
computational domain, but in different volume
concentrations, and coupled systems of conservation
Figure 12. The configuration of flame spread over
equations are derived for every phase. The results from
thin solids. (a) Upward spread in buoyant flows in a
the first numerical simulations using simplified models
large chamber. (The cutaway flame isotherms on
demonstrated that accounting for the independent heat
the symmetry plane (Z=0cm) are shown.) (From
fluxes in each phase and thermal exchange between
Ref. 7)
phases could create vastly different scenarios for ignition
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

and combustion. Validating such a sophisticated numerical tool against practical configurations requires fine grid
resolution due to the presence of multiple scales. The development of a code based on new parallel program
architecture will therefore be undertaken and designed to run on exascale computers.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

D. Diagnostics
5. Fuel characteristics
Knowledge of the Heat Release Rate (HRR) per unit fuel mass is a crucial input to the aforementioned
simulations. This quantity can be determined through experimentation in the Flame Propagation Apparatus (FPA) at
University of Edinburgh. The FPA is a bench scale fire calorimeter which uses high power halogen lamps to expose
material samples to incident heat fluxes. A horizontally mounted candidate material sample of 100mm x 100mm is
positioned on a load cell in a quartz tube which allows the airflow around the sample to be accurately controlled.
Outflow from the tube is collected in an exhaust hood and is drawn through a duct containing various sensors, of
which specifically the gas analyzers and thermocouples are worth mentioning. A sample of the material relevant for
the project was exposed to a heat flux of 50kW/m2 in the presence of a pilot flame. Once the sample was ignited, it
was allowed to burn until all available fuel was consumed. The Heat Release Rate (HRR) was then determined using
the principles of oxygen consumption calorimetry.
6. Soot Volume Fraction
A laser beam extinction technique similar to the one used for earlier quantification of soot production into a flat
plate diffusion flame established in microgravity16 is currently developed at UPMC. The backlighting source will be
located along one a side of the sample and the light attenuation through the flame will be measured by a set of
cameras settled on the other side of the sample. This diagnostic technique provides an approximate absorption
coefficient field, and therefore a map of the soot volume fraction. This field enables the evaluation of the optical
thickness of the flame, which is a crucial parameter in the estimation of the radiative heat feedback from the flame to
the fuel plate. As modeling soot production inside flames still remains a very interesting topic, the measured
absorption field inside the flame could be used as an inner condition imposed into the computational domain, and
thus enhance the accuracy of the numerical simulations. Moreover, the development of the technique requires prior
settings along experiments performed with the actual conditions (especially selected fuel and oxygen content) in
parabolic flights. The set of ground-based experimental data collected in this way will also allow comparison
between different qualities of microgravity in terms of soot production.

V. Conclusion
Predicting the end state of an unconstrained fire in a spacecraft and validating NASA’s flammability test
methods are probably the areas of greatest uncertainty in our effort to ensure the fire safety of future spacecraft.
These questions are being addressed by a material flammability experiment that can be conducted on an ISS
resupply vehicle after it has undocked from the ISS and before it reenters the atmosphere. This provides a habitable
pressurized environment of considerable size without the hazards associated with a crewed vehicle. Exploitation of
this opportunity would enable study of practical low-g material flammability phenomena that are important for
spacecraft design yet cannot be studied in ISS facilities or other orbital platforms. This experiment has been shown
to be feasible on both ESA’s ATV and Orbital’s Cygnus vehicles with the Cygnus as the current baseline carrier.
Because of the early interaction with ESA, an international topical team has been formed to develop concepts for
that experiment and work towards its implementation. An experimental concept is being developed that will
investigate oxygen flammability limits and flame spread over a large fuel sample in a long-term low gravity
environment. Additional tasks in the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration Project are being conducted to identify
sample materials and verify the predictions of pressure rise in the re-entry vehicle during the experiment. This
experiment will be a landmark for spacecraft fire safety with the data and subsequent analysis providing much
needed verifications of spacecraft fire safety protocol for the crews of future exploration vehicles and habitats.,

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support of the various space and research agencies that have supported this work
including but not limited to: JAXA, ESA, RSA, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, and the Spacecraft Fire
Safety Demonstration Project of the NASA Advanced Exploration Systems Program.

11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

Downloaded by David Urban on July 18, 2013 | http://arc.aiaa.org | DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-3410

REFERENCES
1.
Ruff, G.A., Urban, D.L., Pedley, M.D., Johnson, P.T., Safety Design for Space Systems edited by Gary Musgrave et al.
Chapter 27 “Fire Safety,” Elsevier, 2009.
2.
Hirsch, D.B., Williams, J.H., Haas, J.P., Beeson, H.D., and Pedley, M.D., “Oxygen Concentration Flammability
Thresholds of Selected Aerospace Materials Considered for the Constellation Program,” Proceedings of the 2nd IAASS
Conference, Chicago, May 14-16, 2007; (also ESA SP-645, July 2007).
3.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Technical Standard 6001.A, “Flammability, Odor, Offgassing, and
Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures for Materials in Environments That Support Combustion,” 2008.
4.
Hirsch, D.B., Williams, J.H., Harper, S.A., Beeson, H.D., Ruff, G.A., and Pedley, M.D., “Pressure Effects on the SelfExtinguishment Limits of Aerospace Materials,” Paper No. 2009-01-2490, 39th International Conference on Environmental
Systems, Savannah, GA, July 12-16, 2009.
5.
Olson, S.L., Ruff, G.A., Miller, F.J., Microgravity Flame Spread in Exploration Atmospheres: Pressure, Oxygen, and
Velocity Effects on Opposed and Concurrent Flame Spread,” Paper No. 2008-01-2005, 38th International Conference on
Environmental Systems, San Francisco, CA, June 29-July 2, 2008.
6.
Olson, S.L., Hirsch, D.B., and Ferkul, P.V., “Improving Materials Flammability Screening For Spacecraft Fire Safety,”
Proceedings of the 2010 Technical Meeting of the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute, Champaign, Illinois, March
2010.
7.
Gokoglu, S.A., Niehaus, J.E., Olson, S.L., Dietrich, D.L., Ruff, G.A., Ferkul, P.V., Johnston, M.C. “Prevention of
Over-Pressurization During Combustion in a Sealed Chamber,” 42nd International Conference on Environmental Systems
(ICES), San Diego, CA, July 16-19, 2012.
8.
A.C. Fernandez-Pello, "Flame Spread Modeling," Comb. Sci. Technol. 39, 119–134, 1984.
9.
J.S. T'ien, H. Shih, C. Jiang, H.D. Ross, F.J. Miller, A.C. Fernandez-Pello, J.L. Torero, D.C. Walther, "Mechanisms of
Flame Spread and Smolder Wave Propagation," Microgravity Combustion: Fire in Free Fall, H.D. Ross (Editor), Academic
Press, 299-417, 2001.
10. J.L. Torero, T. Vietoris, G. Legros, P. Joulain, "Estimation of a Total Mass Transfer Number from the Stand-Off
Distance of a Spreading Flame," Combust. Sci. Technol. 174, 187–203, 2002.
11. S.-Y. Hsu and J.S. T’ien,: Flame spread over solids in buoyant and forced concurrent flows: model computation and
comparison with experiments, Proc. Comb. Inst. 33, 2433-2440, 2011.
12. G. Legros, A. Fuentes, S. Rouvreau, P. Joulain, B. Porterie, J.L. Torero, "Transport mechanisms controlling soot
production inside a non-buoyant laminar diffusion flame," Proc. Comb. Inst. 32, 2009 2461-2470, 2009.
13. Y. Takano, O. Fujita, N. Shigeta, Y. Nakamura, H. Ito, "Ignition limits of short-term overloaded electric wires in
microgravity," to appear (available online) in Proc. Comb. Inst. 34, 2013.
14. Y.-T. Tseng, "Three-dimensional model of solid ignition and ignition limit by a non-uniformly distributed radiant heat
source," PhD dissertation, Case Western Reserve University, August 2011.
15. N.N. Smirnov, O.E. Ivashnyov, V.A. Nerchenko, A.E. Kazakova, "Spacecraft Foton-M in-flight thermal conditions,"
Acta Astronautica 68, 52–62, 2011.
16. G. Legros, P. Joulain, J.P. Vantelon, D. Bertheau, A. Fuentes, J.L. Torero, "Soot volume fraction measurements in a
three-dimensional laminar diffusion flame established in microgravity," Combust. Sci. Technol. 178, 2006 813–835, 2006.

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

