Effect of Longitudinal Oscillations on Downward Flame Spread over Thin Solid Fuels
Vedha Nayagam and Kurt R. Sacksteder, NCSER/NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Results:

Abstract:
Downward flame spread rates over vertically vibrated thin fuel samples
are measured in air at one atmospheric pressure under normal gravity.
Unlike flame spread against forced‐convective flows, the present results
show that with increasing vibration acceleration the flame spread rate
increases before being blown off at high acceleration levels causing
flame extinction. A simple scaling analysis seems to explain this
phenomenon, which may have important implications to flammability
studies including in microgravity environments.

Based on the experimental results three different flame spread regimes can be 
identified (Fig.2):
a)  Natural convection dominated regime,
b)  Vibration dominated thermally controlled regime, and
c)  Vibration dominated chemically controlled regime.

Streamwise length scale is the amplitude of vibration: 
y, flame standoff distance

vibration

Understanding the mechanisms of opposed‐flow flame spread over solid
fuels is of fundamental as well as practical interest in the area of fire
safety. In the past the effects of buoyancy [2], forced flow velocities [1,3],
and fuel thickness, among others, on flame spread rates against an
opposing flow of oxidizer have been investigated both experimentally and
theoretically. It has been observed that for thermally thin fuels the
flame spread rate remains independent of the external flow velocity,
naturally induced or forced, up to a certain value then begins to decrease
with increasing flow speed eventually leading to flame extinction due to
finite rate chemical kinetic effects.
Here we study the effects of
longitudinal oscillations of the fuel sample on flame spread rates.

Experiments:
Thin strips of ashless cellulose filter papers (Whatman #44) mounted on a
metal sample holder are vibrated vertically at various frequencies and
acceleration levels and ignited on top. The vibration frequencies varied in
the range 0 to 65 Hz and the acceleration levels g/g0 in the range 1 to 32,
where g0 is the earth normal gravitational acceleration. The RMS
acceleration and frequencies are measured using an accelerometer. Video
images of the vertical downward flame spread process are recorded and
an average spread rate for a flame travel of 10 cm is measured and
reported here.

2.5 cm 

fuel sample

For thermally controlled regime a simplified energy balance at the
leading edge of the fuel sample yields:

x, forward conduction length

U, Induced velocity

Introduction:

Scaling:

gravity vector

, fuel half thickness

Figure 2.  Flame spread rate as a function of acceleration for various vibration 
frequencies.
Natural convection regime:
For low acceleration levels (g/g0 < ~ 8) the flame spread rate is relatively
independent of the acceleration or frequency values. In this regime the gas‐
phase flow is still dominated by the buoyancy induced flow and the fuel surface
oscillations do not alter the boundary layer substantially.
Vibration dominated thermally controlled regime:
As the vibration acceleration (g) increases beyond certain level the flame spread
rate increases. For a fixed acceleration in this regime the spread rate slightly
decreases with increasing frequency. Note that the characteristic velocity of the
fuel plate is ~ g/ and unlike flame spread against an opposing forced flow the
measured spread rate increases with increasing plate velocity (see, Fig. 3).
Vibration dominated chemically controlled regime:
When the fuel surface velocity (g/ becomes sufficiently high, finite‐rate
chemical kinetic effects become important and the flame is eventually
extinguished due to insufficient residence time for heat release. Figure 3 shows
the present spread rates plotted as function of effective fuel surface velocity
(g/) along with the forced flow results from [1, 3]. It is interesting note that
extinction occurs around the same velocity range of 120 cm/s as in [3] where the
same fuel was used. Hirano and Sato [1] used somewhat thicker samples. In this
regime close to extinction it is difficult to ignite the sample, the flame spread
become unsteady and unstable [1] and considerable scatter in the experimental
data occurs.

10 cm

sample holder

Normal length scale (Stokes thickness): 
Spread rate then becomes: 
Figure 4 shows Uf plotted against (g/2/3). As seen in Fig. 4 the
correlation is improved in the thermally controlled regime, but close to
extinction further analysis is necessary.

Figure 4. Flame spread rate as a function of (g/2/3) for various vibration
frequencies.

Conclusions and future work:
It is shown that the nature of the gas‐phase velocity profile has
significant influence on the flame spread rate even for thermally thin
fuels. Unlike forced or natural convective flow, the vibration induced
flow leads to substantial increase in spread rate for a fixed ambient
oxygen concentration. High speed photography of the leading edge of
the flame is currently underway and analysis of the video images should
provide further insight into the flame spread process. Dimensionless
correlation of the spread rate against a suitably defined Damkohler
number is also being considered.

References:
1. Hirano. T., and Sato, K., “Effects of radiation and convection on gas velocity and 
temperature profiles of flames spreading over paper,” Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, Vol. 15, 1975, pp. 233‐241.

electro‐dynamic
shaker

2. Altenkirch, R.A., Eichorn, R., and Shang, P.C., “Buoyancy effects on flames 
spreading down thermally thin fuels,” Combustion and Flame, Vol. 37, 1980,  
pp.71‐83.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the experimental setup and a 
photograph of the fuel sample mounted on the shaker.
Figure 4.  Flame spread rate as a function of velocity for various frequencies.

3. Fernandez‐Pello, A.C., Ray, S.R., and Glassman, I., “Flame spread in an opposed 
forced flow: The effect of ambient oxygen concentration, Proceedings of the 
Combustion Institute, Vol. 18, 1981, pp. 579‐589.

8th US National Combustion Meeting, May 19‐22, 2013, Salt Lake City, 

