NUCLEAR THERMAL ROCKET (NTR) DEVELOPMENT RISK COMMUNICATION. Tony Kim, Technology Development and Transfer Office, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC, AL 35812, tony.kim@nasa.gov

There are clear advantages of development of a Nuclear Thermal Rocket (NTR) for a crewed mission to
Mars. NTR for in-space propulsion enables more ambitious space missions by providing high thrust at high
specific impulse (~900 sec) that is 2 times the best
theoretical performance possible for chemical rockets.
Missions can be optimized for maximum payload capability to take more payload with reduced total mass
to orbit; saving cost on reduction of the number of
launch vehicles needed. Or missions can be optimized
to minimize trip time significantly to reduce the deep
space radiation exposure to the crew. NTR propulsion
technology is a game changer for space exploration.
However, “NUCLEAR” is a word that is feared and
vilified by some groups and the hostility towards development of any nuclear systems can meet great opposition by the public as well as from national leaders
and people in authority. Communication of nuclear
safety will be critical to the success of the development
of the NTR.
Why is there a fear of nuclear? A bomb that can level
a city is a scary weapon. The first and only times the
Nuclear Bomb was used in a war was on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki during World War 2. The “Little Boy”
atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6,
1945 and the “Fat Man” on Nagasaki 3 days later on
August 9th. Within the first 4 months of bombings, 90166 thousand people died in Hiroshima and 60-80
thousand died in Nagasaki. It is important to note for
comparison that over 500 thousand people died and 5
million made homeless due to strategic bombing (~150
thousand tons) of Japanese cities and war assets with
conventional non-nuclear weapons between 19421945. A major bombing campaign of “firebombing”
of Tokyo called “Operation Meetinghouse” on March
9 & 10 consisting of 334 B-29’s dropped ~1,700 tons
of bombs around 16 square mile area and over 100
thousand people have been estimated to have died.
The declaration of death is very clear for conventional
weapons and then the declaration of death due to radiation becomes vague and unclear. This may have
been due to people mis-understanding the dangers and
effects of radiation when assessing the damage and
harm to people initially, but it is also become insidious
when expressing opposition to nuclear energy.
A nuclear radiation accident can be scary due to the
power involved and the fear of radiation release. The

International Atomic Energy Agency defines a nuclear
and radiation accident a “an event that has led to significant consequences to people, the environment or
the facility.” There have been 3 commercial nuclear
reactor accidents (Chernobyl, Three Mile Island, and
Fukushima) that stand out to the public and much of
the information about the result and impact to workers,
environment, and public can be misleading. Often
information is presented without clear correlation with
radiation and other pertinent information is left out
presenting a very scary situation to affect the emotions
of the reader. A very boring but “critically acclaimed”
movie was made in 1979 called “The China Syndrome” starring Jane Fonda and Jack Lemmon. The
film was released on March 16, 1979, 12 days before
the 3-Mile Island nuclear accident in Pennsylvania.
The basis from the movie was from a few nuclear plant
incidents and in particular, the Brown’s Ferry Alabama
Power Plant fire. In one scene from the movie, a physicist Dr. Elliott Lowell played by Donald Hotton states
that a China Syndrome event would make “an area the
size of Pennsylvania” permanently uninhabitable.
Real serious nuclear incidents like Chernobyl and Fukushima are often sited to make people fear the consequences of using nuclear power. However, the consequences are at best poorly communicated and at worst
fictitiously inflated to instigate social unrest against
nuclear power. There is an article being circulated on
Facebook with a title “28 Signs that the (US) West
Coast is being absolutely fried with nuclear radiation
from Fukushima” which focus on mis-information and
fear mongering.
Nuclear power and NTR are powerful resources that
can open many doors for future prosperity and capability. With great power comes great responsibility. Radiation and its effects need to be better understood,
quantified, and communicated. A human mission to
mars has its own risks of deep space radiation and is
considered a considerable risk at 400 milli-Sieverts per
year in deep space and 245 milli-Sieverts per year on
the surface of Mars as measured by the Mars Curiosity
mission. Although these quantities of ionizing radiation are within the astronaut career limit, it exceeds the
yearly average amounts of ionizing radiation. Astronaut crews have experienced these levels of radiation
before, but for durations shorter than a year, and a mission to Mars could possibly be 3 years in length.
There is also evidence that people can comfortably
handle higher levels of ionizing radiation where the

radiation occurs naturally like Ramsar, Iran when people can experience 270 milli-Sieverts per year.
A risk posture that the development, test, and flight of
an NTR will meet opposition from groups who oppose
nuclear energy must be likely and the impact can be
sever to the effort. Active risk mitigation must be taken for an NTR full-scale development project. The
NTR design must take into account safety for transport
and off nominal conditions. Nuclear fuel element must
consider containment of fission products and Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) that may meet less opposition
should be considered for safety and security reasons.
Even though testing was conducted on Rover/NERVA
safely and successfully in the 60’s with exhaust sent
heavenward in to open air, modern testing of NTR
must consider full containment and no release of ionizing radiation to the public and must meet the current
requirement of no more than 0.1 milli-Sieverts per year
to the public. 0.1 milli-Sieverts is equivalent to eating
one banana or a 20 hour plane flight. Good communication with the public and regulatory agencies will be
essential to show that all effort is applied toward protection to the public and astronauts. The inspiring
endeavor to put humans on Mars to study the planet,
search for life, and learn more about this Solar System
will be full of risks but it will be worth it. NTR will be
worth the development effort if it allows humans to
explore our Solar System.

