Spring Technical Meeting of the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute
Mar 16–18, 2014

Gaseous Non-Premixed Flame Research Planned for the
International Space Station
Dennis P. Stocker1,*, Fumiaki Takahashi2, J. Mark Hickman1,
and Andrew C. Suttles1
1

2

NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44135, USA
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA

Thus far, studies of gaseous diffusion flames on the International Space Station (ISS) have been limited to
research conducted in the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) in mid-2009 and early 2012. The
research was performed with limited instrumentation, but novel techniques allowed for the determination of
the soot temperature and volume fraction. Development is now underway for the next experiments of this
type. The Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project consists of five
independent experiments that will be conducted with expanded instrumentation within the station’s
Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR). ACME’s goals are to improve our understanding of flame stability and
extinction limits, soot control and reduction, oxygen-enriched combustion which could enable practical
carbon sequestration, combustion at fuel lean conditions where both optimum performance and low
emissions can be achieved, the use of electric fields for combustion control, and materials flammability.
The microgravity environment provides longer residence times and larger length scales, yielding a broad
range of flame conditions which are beneficial for simplified analysis, e.g., of limit behavior where
chemical kinetics are important. The detailed design of the modular ACME hardware, e.g., with
exchangeable burners, is nearing completion, and it is expected that on-orbit testing will begin in 2016.

1. Introduction
Microgravity, i.e., apparent near weightlessness, is a unique environment for conducting
combustion research. Many flames are dramatically influenced by the effective elimination of
buoyant convection, where the resulting effects are often advantageous. For example, it is
possible to create spherically symmetric flames enabling one-dimensional analysis. More
generally, the effective elimination of flicker yields quasi-steady flames. Furthermore, the length
scales are increased in microgravity flames facilitating analysis of the flame structure.
Microgravity flames tend to have a much stronger sensitivity to their atmosphere than normalgravity flames and exhibit a much broader range of characteristics. For example, the long
residence times in microgravity flames can lead to strong soot production, but many
microgravity flames are soot free. Even neglecting soot, microgravity flames can be appropriate
for studies of limit and stability behavior where chemical kinetics are important. It is also
possible to study momentum-dominated flames at low velocities. And of course, microgravity is
the appropriate environment for studies related to spacecraft fire safety.
Although microgravity combustion research has been conducted in drop facilities and research
aircraft flying parabolic maneuvers, spacecraft like the International Space Station (ISS) offer
significant advantages. Drop durations, which are ~5 s or less in NASA facilities, are too short
for soot to achieve quasi-steady conditions. The drop durations are also too short to first
establish a flame and then vary its flow rate, for example, to investigate stability or extinction
*Corresponding author. Email address: dennis.p.stocker@nasa.gov

1

limits. Meanwhile, low-momentum flames can be dramatically disturbed by the g-jitter present
in the aircraft testing, which is nominally ±0.02 g for a ~20 s duration. The jitter can be avoided
by floating an experiment within the aircraft, but that reduces the test duration to mere seconds.
As a result, space-based testing is often necessary to get microgravity conditions of sufficient
duration and quality for combustion research.
Given the many advantages of space-based combustion research, five gas-fueled non-premixed
flame experiments have thus far been conducted in space, where they are listed chronologically
in Table 1. Three experiments were conducted over a decade ago on the space shuttle, i.e., the
Space Transportation System (STS). The other two were conducted within the last five years on
the ISS. This past research was focused on gravity’s effects on the flame structure, soot and
stability limits, and vortex interactions. In each experiment, the flame configuration was the
laminar gas-jet diffusion flame, where vortices were created in the TGDF experiment by varying
the air entrainment (through mechanical control of an iris centered near the burner tube outlet).
The research has included flames in both quiescent and coflowing atmospheres. The LSP and
TGDF experiments were conducted in sealed combustion chambers. In contrast, the flame was
enclosed within a small flow duct (with a 76-mm square cross-section) in the ELF, SPICE, and
SLICE experiments. The pressure was consistently ~100 kPa, with the exception of the LSP
experiment which also included testing at lower values. In all cases, the atmosphere consisted of
~21% oxygen (by volume) with a balance of nitrogen. Tests have been conducted with a variety
of fuels (including dilutions) and burner diameters.
Table 1: Past space experiments investigating gaseous non-premixed flames,
listed chronologically.

Experiment
Laminar Soot
Processes
(LSP)
Turbulent Gasjet Diffusion
Flames (TGDF)
Enclosed
Laminar
Flames (ELF)
Soot Processes
In Coflow
Experiment
(SPICE)
Structure &
Liftoff In
Combustion
Experiment
(SLICE)

Principal Investigator (PI) and Co-Investigators
(Co-Is) when the experiment was conducted

Mission (year) Refs.
STS-83 (1997),
STS-94 (1997),
STS-107 (2003)

[1-6]

STS-97 (1997)

[7-12]

STS-97 (1997)

[13-16]

PI David L. Urban (NASA Glenn Research Center)
Co-I Peter B. Sunderland (University of Maryland)

ISS (2009, 2012)

[17-20]

PI Marshall B. Long (Yale University)
Co-I Mitchell D. Smooke (Yale University)
Co-I Fumiaki Takahashi (Case Western Reserve Univ.)
Co-I Dennis P. Stocker (NASA Glenn Research Center)

ISS (2012)

[21-22]

PI Gerard M. Faeth (University of Michigan)
PI M. Yousef Bahadori (Science Applications International
Corporation)
Co-I Uday G. Hegde (National Center for Microgravity
Research)
PI Lea-Der Chen (University of Iowa)
Co-I Dennis P. Stocker (NASA Lewis Research Center)
Co-I John E. Brooker (NASA Lewis Research Center)

2

The SPICE and SLICE experiments were both conducted in the Microgravity Science Glovebox
(MSG) using common hardware which has since been used for the Burning and Suppression of
Solids (BASS) experiment. The manually-operated hardware, e.g., where the ISS crew
controlled the flow with a potentiometer, was based on the preceding ELF experiment and was
designed for exploratory studies. The flame instrumentation was limited to a high-resolution
digital still camera, an analog video camera, and a thermopile radiometer with a manuallyadjustable gain. In addition to the radiometer output, the fuel flow, the coflow fan voltage, a
coflow reference velocity, and a time stamp were both displayed and recorded through a video
overlay. Despite the limited instrumentation, pyrometric measurements were made in 2012 of
the soot temperature and volume fraction using the innovative techniques discussed in [23-24].
While these experiments proved to be valuable, more can be accomplished on the ISS.
In 2008, the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) [25] was delivered to the International Space
Station. The facility is similar to a vending machine in size and includes a 100-liter combustion
chamber capable of operation at pressures of up to 300 kPa. The chamber features a ring of 8
sapphire windows and is equipped with reconfigurable imaging systems (described later in this
paper). CIR includes a gas delivery system and provides venting, thermal control, electrical
power, data handling, image processing and storage, and vibration isolation. CIR experiments
are conducted using unique hardware both inside and outside of the chamber. Unlike the SPICE
and SLICE experiments which were heavily dependent on the crew, the CIR experiments are
commanded from the ground, limiting the crew’s responsibility to set up (e.g., exchange of gas
bottles) and trouble shooting. Since its launch, the CIR has been used for droplet combustion
experiments, e.g., as seen in Figure 1, but future experiments are now in development.

Figure 1: From left to right, the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) with the Multi-user Droplet
Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) removed from the chamber for servicing by Expedition 34
Commander Kevin Ford. The photo was taken on Dec. 12, 2012 in the U.S. (Destiny) Laboratory
of the International Space Station. [NASA photo ISS034-E-007409]

3

Gaseous flames will be investigated in the next set of CIR experiments as part of NASA’s
Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) project. ACME currently
includes five independent experiments, listed in Table 2, which are each focused on advanced
combustion technology through fundamental research. Although distinct, the experiments will
be conducted with a single modular CIR insert similar to the MDCA seen in Fig. 1. Laminar,
non-premixed flames are used in all of the current ACME experiments. To simplify analysis, the
flames are either one or two dimensional, depending upon the experiment.
Table 2: Planned ISS experiments investigating gaseous non-premixed flames,
listed alphabetically.

Experiment
Burning Rate Emulator (BRE)
Coflow Laminar Diffusion Flame
(CLD Flame)
Electric-Field Effects on Laminar
Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames)

Flame Design

Structure and Response of Spherical
Diffusion Flames (s-Flame)

Principal Investigator (PI) and Co-Investigators (Co-Is)
PI James G. Quintiere (University of Maryland)
Co-I Peter B. Sunderland (University of Maryland)
PI Marshall B. Long (Yale University)
Co-I Mitchell D. Smooke (Yale University)
PI Derek Dunn-Rankin (University of California, Irvine)
Co-I (former) Felix J. Weinberg (Imperial College London)
Co-I (former) Zeng-Guang Yuan (National Center for Space
Exploration Research)
PI Richard L. Axelbaum (Washington University in St. Louis)
Co-I Beei-Huan Chao (University of Hawaii)
Co-I Peter B. Sunderland (University of Maryland)
Co-I David L. Urban (NASA Glenn Research Center)
PI Chung K. Law (Princeton University)
Co-I Stephen D. Tse (Rutgers University)
Co-I Kurt R. Sacksteder (NASA Glenn Research Center)

2. Science
The current ACME experiments are primarily focused on energy and environmental concerns,
but there is a secondary emphasis (with the BRE experiment) on fire prevention, especially for
spacecraft. The primary objective is to gain fundamental understanding that can enable
improved efficiency and reduced emissions in practical combustion processes on Earth, for
example through the development and verification of models for chemical kinetics and transport
processes in computational simulations. In addition to enhanced performance, improved
modeling capability can lead to reductions in the time and cost for combustor design. Some
specific goals are to improve our understanding of combustion at fuel lean conditions where both
optimum performance and low emissions can be achieved, soot control and reduction, oxygenenriched combustion which could enable practical carbon sequestration, flame stability and
extinction limits, the use of electric fields for combustion control, and materials flammability.
Unlike the other current ACME experiments, the Burning Rate Emulator (BRE) experiment is
focused on spacecraft fire prevention. More specifically, BRE’s objective is to improve our
fundamental understanding of materials flammability, such as extinction behavior and the
conditions needed for sustained combustion, and to assess the relevance of existing flammability
4

test methods for low and partial-gravity environments. A flat porous burner fed with gaseous
fuel will simulate the burning of solid and liquid fuels, where measurements are made of the
thermal feedback (i.e., to the burner) upon which the vaporization of condensed-phase fuels is
dependent. A small number of gaseous fuels (including mixtures with inert gases) will be used
to simulate the burning of fuels such as paper, plastic, and alcohol by matching properties such
as the heats of combustion and gasification, the surface temperature, and smoke point.
Research, including that already conducted in microgravity, has revealed that our current
predictive ability is significantly lacking for flames at the extremes of fuel dilution, namely for
sooty pure-fuel flames and dilute flames that are near extinction. The goal of the Coflow
Laminar Diffusion Flame (CLD Flame) experiment is to extend the range of flame conditions
that can be accurately predicted by developing and experimentally verifying chemical kinetic and
soot formation submodels. The dependence of normal coflow flames on injection velocity and
fuel dilution will be carefully examined for flames at both very dilute and highly sooting
conditions. Measurements will be made of the structure of diluted methane and ethylene flames
in an air coflow. Lifted flames will be used as the basis for the research to avoid flame
dependence on heat loss to the burner. The results of this experiment will be directly applicable
to practical combustion issues such as turbulent combustion, ignition, flame stability, and more.
The SLICE experiment was conducted as a precursor to ACME’s CLD Flame experiment, in
order to maximize its science, e.g., through refinement of the test matrix.
An electric field can strongly influence flames because of its effect on the ions produced by the
combustion reactions. The direct ion transport and the induced ion wind can modify the flame
shape, alter the soot or flammability limits, direct heat transfer, and reduce pollutant emission.
The purpose of the Electric-Field Effects on Laminar Diffusion Flames (E-FIELD Flames)
experiment is to gain an improved understanding of flame ion production and investigate how
the ions can be used to control non-premixed flames. Outside reviewers concluded that the
experiment “has great prospects of improving our understanding of nearly every practical
combustion device.” The experiment will be conducted with a simple gas-jet flame, where an
electric field will be generated by creating a high voltage (up to 10 kV) differential between the
burner and a flat circular mesh above (i.e., downstream of) the burner. Measurements will be
made of the ion current through the flame and the flame’s response to electric forcing as a
function of the field strength, fuel, and fuel dilution.
The primary goal of the Flame Design experiment is to improve our understanding of soot
inception and control in order to enable the optimization of oxygen enriched combustion and the
“design” of non-premixed flames that are both robust and soot free. An outside review panel
declared that Flame Design “… could lead to greatly improved burner designs that are efficient
and less polluting than current designs." Flame Design will investigate the soot inception and
extinction limits of spherical microgravity flames created with porous spherical burners. Tests
will be conducted with various concentrations of both the fuel (i.e., ethylene or methane) and
oxygen in order to determine the role of the flame structure on the soot inception. The effect of
the flow direction on soot formation will be assessed by studying both normal flames and inverse
flames, where in the latter case an oxygen/inert mixture flows from the spherical burner into a
fuel/inert atmosphere. The Flame Design experiment will explore whether the stoichiometric
mixture fraction can characterize soot and flammability limits for non-premixed flames like the
equivalence ratio serves as an indicator of those limits for premixed flames.
5

The purpose of the Structure and Response of Spherical Flames (s-Flame) experiment is to
advance our ability to predict the structure and dynamics, including extinction, of both soot-free
and sooty flames. The spherical flames will be ignited at non-steady conditions and allowed to
transition naturally toward extinction. Tests will be conducted with various inert diluents, in
both the fuel and chamber atmosphere. The fuel gases include hydrogen and methane mixtures
for soot-free flames, and ethylene for sooty flames. One experiment objective is to identify the
extinction limits for both radiative and convective extinction (i.e., at high and low system
Damköhler numbers, respectively). Another objective is to determine the existence, onset, and
nature of pulsating instabilities that have been theoretically predicted to occur in such flames
with fuel/diluent mixtures that are above a critical Lewis number.
3. Experimental
As previously discussed, the ACME experiments will be conducted within the Combustion
Integrated Rack (CIR) using a chamber insert, depicted in Figure 2, which was designed to
accommodate gas delivery to a variety of exchangeable burners. Besides the chamber insert,
other ACME-unique hardware includes a high-definition color camera and an avionics package,
which is for data acquisition and control.

Figure 2: Design of the Advanced Combustion via Microgravity Experiments (ACME) chamber
insert that will be used in the Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR) on ISS.

6

ACME’s chamber insert, which is ~0.4 m in diameter, provides common mounting for a variety
of burners on the chamber axis (but only one at a time) and includes a retracting resistive igniter.
As depicted in Figure 3, there will initially be gas-jet burners (with inner diameters ranging from
0.4 to 3.2 mm), a small coflow burner (where the two concentric tubes have inner diameters of
2.1 and 25 mm), porous spherical burners (with diameters ranging from 6.35 to 12.7 mm), and
two flat porous burners for the BRE experiment (with inner diameters of 25 and 50 mm). Most
burners will be equipped with a surface thermocouple, and each BRE burner will have two heat
flux transducers. The internal pressure of the porous burners will be measured to allow
monitoring of the pressure differential across the outlet surface. The igniter will have a crewexchangeable tip and arm (to accommodate the various burners) and its stepper-motor drive will
allow for precise positioning.

Figure 3: ACME burner types, including from left to right, gas-jet burners, a co-flow burner,
porous spherical burners, and flat porous burners for the BRE experiment.

The chamber insert includes three mass flow controllers (visible on the left of Fig. 2) for the
delivery of fuel, oxidizer or inert (e.g., helium or carbon dioxide), and nitrogen to the burner.
The maximum fuel flow is 2 slpm (on a nitrogen basis), whereas much higher flows, e.g., 10
slpm (on a nitrogen basis), are possible for the oxidizer and nitrogen lines. The crew can
exchange the mass flow controllers to provide appropriate ranges that maximize the flow
accuracy. The gas delivery system enables on-orbit dilution of the fuel or oxidizer (but not both
simultaneously), coflow, inverse flames (e.g., oxidizer delivery to the center of a coflow burner),
and premixed flames, although the latter are not planned for any of the current ACME
experiments. Gases can also be delivered premixed to the space station where that is necessary
in some circumstances, such as the blending of different fuel gases. CIR’s standard bottle sizes
are 1, 2.25, and 3.8 liters but ACME will sometimes use smaller bottles as a hazard control to
limit the deficient reactant (e.g., fuel) that can be released into the combustion chamber.
ACME’s primary flame diagnostics are a suite of imaging systems including five video cameras
and two illumination systems, of which three cameras are part of the CIR facility and are already
in use on orbit. All but one of the cameras is mounted outside of the chamber. Collectively, the
imaging systems will enable color, CH*, and OH* imaging; pyrometry; measurement of the soot
volume fraction; and operational support. However, it is unlikely that all functions would be
exercised at any one time as will become apparent in the subsequent discussion.
Color imaging is provided by two cameras: a high-definition digital camera mounted outside of
the chamber and a standard analog camera mounted on the chamber insert (with a turning
mirror). Both cameras are part of the ACME hardware that is now in development. The analog
7

camera signal will be downlinked in near real time to support the experiment operations. Lightemitting diodes within the chamber can be used to illuminate the igniter and burner to both
support the operations and provide reference images. The 12-bit digital camera records at up to
30 full frames (1360x1024) per second, and is equipped with a motorized lens with independent
control of the zoom, iris, and focus. The digital camera will be equipped with a filter assembly
with four options, where selection of a clear “filter” allows for color imaging. Color imaging can
also be carried out with a blue-green BG7 Schott glass filter, which balances the color planes to
avoid saturation in the red while maintaining sensitivity in the blue and green. The natural flame
color can be approximately reconstructed, but the primary purpose of the filter is pyrometry and
measurement of the soot volume fraction, again via the techniques of [23-24]. Alternately, CH*
imaging can be conducted with this camera because the filter assembly includes a 430-nm
bandpass filter with a 10-nm full width at half-maximum transmission (FWHM). A 450-nm
bandpass filter (again with a 10-nm FWHM) can be used with the CH* filter to effectively
subtract interfering broadband soot emission. However, the filter assembly rotates slowly so
such subtraction effectively requires a separate test with each filter and of course reproducible
flame conditions.
Pyrometry can alternately be accomplished with CIR’s monochrome High-Bit Depth
Multispectral (HiBMs) camera, equipped with a Liquid-Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF), which
allows for imaging at multiple spectra, but requires a quasi-steady flame for measurement at each
desired band. This camera has a telecentric optical system and is recorded at 512x512 and 30
frames per second (fps). Although it has a 1024x1024 pixel array, binning has been necessary
because of signal loss through the LCTF. Both soot pyrometry and Thin Filament Pyrometry
(TFP) are possible, where ACME is equipped with a crew-replaceable array of 5 silicon carbide
(SiC) fibers. The fibers are orthogonal to the flame axis and the array can be translated along the
flame axis to the desired position downstream of the burner, e.g., based on the downlink of the
analog video. During set up, the crew can manually orient the array so that it is orthogonal to
either ACME’s color digital camera or the HiBMs camera with the LCTF. An alternate fiber
array including a platinum wire will be used for inflight characterization, which in combination
with preflight calibration will enable determination of the soot volume fraction [24].
CIR has a second HiBMs camera, without a filter, that will be used in combination with CIR’s
illumination package for alternate measurements of the soot volume fraction. This will be
accomplished via an extinction technique previously employed in microgravity [3,6,26], where
the camera and the collimated light source (with its two fiber-coupled laser diodes) are
positioned at opposite windows. The images are recorded at 1024x1024 and 30 fps. Thus far,
the primary purpose of this combined system has been the measurement of the droplet diameter
for determination of the droplet burning rate.
CIR’s Low-Light-Level Ultraviolet (LLL-UV) package is a monochrome camera with an
intensifier (for 280-700 nm) and a 310-nm bandpass filter (with a 10-nm FWHM) for OH*
imaging. Again as a result of the signal loss through the filter, binning is employed such that the
OH* images are recorded at 512x512 and 30 fps.
The ACME chamber insert will also be equipped with non-imaging optical diagnostics including
both thermopile radiometers and Photomultiplier Tubes (PMTs). There is a crew-exchangeable
linear array of radiometers of which there are two versions supporting the initial set of
experiments. The array has a fixed position which is parallel to the chamber axis and centered
(along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows and thus most of the other
8

instrumentation. One array is equipped with a single wide-view radiometer with two narrowview radiometers that are downstream and two more that are upstream, where all views are
orthogonal to the chamber axis, as depicted in Figure 4. The narrow-view radiometers are
intended to support studies of gas-jet flames, where ACME can accommodate shorter burners,
making the “lower” detectors useful. The other array, also seen in Fig. 4, provides for three
wide-view measurements of the flame, where one view is masked to nominally block radiant
emission from the burner. It was specifically designed for the BRE experiment but will be a
resource available to other ACME experiments. Given that the radiometer array can be
exchanged by the crew, alternate arrays could be developed.

Figure 4: Crew-exchangeable radiometer arrays on the ACME chamber insert: (top) standard
(ACME) array of 5 radiometers, and (bottom) array with three radiometers, designed for the BRE
experiment, where the lowest detector is masked to avoid view of the burner.

9

An additional wide-view radiometer, that is fixed and not crew exchangeable, is positioned
downstream of the burner and flame at 30o from the chamber axis. This detector is primarily
intended to support the spherical flame experiments and will have a quicker response than the
more sensitive detectors that will used in the linear arrays. Like the radiometers on the two
linear arrays, it will have a spectral range of nominally 0.2-11 micron and its field of view will
be established by an appropriately selected aperture.
To detect the quenching of dim flames, the chamber insert will be equipped with a set of three
PMTs. Each PMT will have a wide-angle view, a sight line that is orthogonal to the chamber
axis, and will be centered (along the chamber length) relative to the chamber windows so that it
is aligned with most of the other instrumentation. The PMTs’ spectral range will be 230-700 nm,
i.e., visible and near ultraviolet, but one will have a 310-nm bandpass filter and another will have
a 430-nm bandpass filter (where both are with a 10-nm FWHM). The pair of detectors will
enable measurement of OH* and CH* emission, respectively. The third PMT will be equipped
with a neutral density filter to prevent saturation. Like many other components, the PMT array
can be removed from the chamber insert by the crew.
The chamber insert is also equipped with six far-field thermocouples to measure the spread of
the thermal field in the spherical flame experiments. They are of limited utility for other
experiments because they are positioned upstream of the burner tip. Therefore, they will
generally not be installed by the crew to reduce the chance of accidental damage. There will be
two versions of a four-thermocouple rake to allow a choice of near and far measurements. Other
arrays could be designed to support future experiments, but they cannot extend downstream of
the burner tip without interfering with other (e.g., optical) measurements.
Experiment-unique hardware is also mounted on the chamber insert. For example, to
accommodate the E-FIELD Flames experiment, the insert is equipped with a high-voltage supply
and a crew-removable electrode mesh which can be set between +10 and -10 kV. The circular
mesh is orthogonal to the chamber axis and is positioned (during set up) at either ~35 or ~50 mm
downstream of the insulated burner. The ion current between the burner and electrode mesh will be
determined via measurement of the voltage drop across a known resistor and application of Ohm’s
Law.
Additional supporting measurements will be made, where the chamber pressure is a simple
example. The ACME experiments will use the CIR’s gas chromatograph for pre- and post-test
analysis of the chamber atmosphere, e.g., for oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide, and fuel gases. Acceleration measurements will be provided by the Space
Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS) [27], which is the primary instrument for such
measurements on ISS and previously served that role for the space shuttle.
All ACME experiments will be constant volume (i.e., rather than constant pressure) studies,
where the chamber’s free volume will be about 90 liters. Burner flows will generally be
constrained to limit the pressure rise, and tests will typically be 0.5-2 minutes in duration.
The ACME experiments will be configured, but not conducted, by the ISS crew. Instead, the
experiments will be commanded from the ground, specifically from the Telescience Support
Center (TSC) at the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio. They can be conducted
in a nominally automated mode using pre-programmed scripts. However, it will also be possible
to effectively operate the experiments in a “manual” mode, where changes can be made in
response to the analog video downlink and the numerical data available in the telemetry stream.
10

For example, a flow rate could be adjusted to approach a stability or soot limit. Step and ramp
changes can be made in the flow rate(s) or electric field potential. The TFP fiber array can be
translated uniformly through a soot-free flame to get a continuum measurement of the
temperature field. In summary, ACME’s experiment control will allow for broad flexibility.
4. Concluding Remarks
In January 2014, the Obama administration announced that ISS operations will continue until at
least 2024. It is currently expected that the five ACME experiments will be conducted from
2016 to 2019. While there are plans for subsequent CIR experiments, e.g., to study flame spread
across solid fuels, future experiments could be conducted using the ACME hardware. Although
the current ACME experiments are limited to laminar non-premixed flames, turbulent and
burner-stabilized premixed flames could also be studied using the ACME chamber insert. Many
of the hardware elements are exchangeable on orbit, including for example, the burner, igniter
arm and tip, video cameras, radiometer array, PMT array, TFP fiber array, thermocouple rake,
high-voltage supply, electrode mesh, and the gas chromatograph. As such, the hardware can be
customized to support a wide variety of future experiments. Gaseous flames could continue to
burn brightly on the ISS.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the critical contributions of both the ACME investigators (listed in
Table 2) and the ZIN Technologies engineering team developing the ACME hardware and
software, where key members include Brian Borowski, Adrian Drake, Timothy Gobeli, Stephen
Lawn, Michael Medved, and Christopher Mroczka. ACME also benefits significantly from the
support of Eric S. Neumann and his microgravity facilities staff at the NASA Glenn Research
Center in the conduct of ground-based microgravity tests to evaluate prototype burners,
instrumentation, and of course flame behavior and in the design and assembly of the hardware to
conduct those tests.
References
[1] D.L. Urban, Z.G. Yuan, P.B. Sunderland, G.T. Linteris, J.E. Voss, K.C. Lin, Z. Dai, K. Sun, and G.M.
Faeth, “Structure and Soot Properties of Nonbuoyant Ethylene/Air Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” AIAA
Journal, 36 (1998) 1346-1360.
[2] K.C. Lin, G.M. Faeth, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, and Z.G. Yuan, “Shapes of Nonbuoyant Round
Luminous Hydrocarbon/Air Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” Combustion and Flame, 116 (1999) 415-431.
[3] D.L. Urban, Z.G. Yuan, P.B. Sunderland, K.C., Lin, Z. Dai, and G.M. Faeth, “Smoke-Point Properties of
Nonbuoyant Round Laminar Jet Diffusion Flames,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Symposium
(International) on Combustion 28 (2000) 1965-1972.
[4] G.M. Faeth, “Laminar and Turbulent Gaseous Diffusion Flames,” Microgravity Combustion, Fire in FreeFall, H.D. Ross, ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 2001, pp. 83–182.
[5] C. Aalburg, F.J. Diez, G.M. Faeth, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, and Z.-G. Yuan, Shapes of nonbuoyant
round hydrocarbon-fueled laminar-jet diffusion flames in still air, Combustion and Flame, 142 (2005) 1–
16.
[6] F.J. Diez, C. Aalburg, P.B. Sunderland, D.L. Urban, Z.-G. Yuan, G.M. Faeth, “Soot properties of laminar
jet diffusion flames in microgravity,” Combustion and Flame, 156 (2009) 1514-1524.

11

[7] U. Hegde, M.Y. Bahadori, and D.P. Stocker, “Temporal instability and extinction of a microgravity jet
diffusion flame,” AIAA-1999-582, 37th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 11-14 January,
1999.
[8] M.Y. Bahadori, U. Hegde, and D.P. Stocker, “Radiative and thermal fields of jet diffusion flames in a
spacecraft environment,” AIAA-1999-587, 37th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 11-14
January, 1999.
[9] M.Y. Bahadori, U. Hegde, and D.P. Stocker, “Analysis of the Combustion Products of Microgravity Jet
Diffusion Flames,” Paper WSS/CI-99F30, Fall Western States Meeting of The Combustion Institute,
Irvine, CA, 25-26 October 1999.
[10] M.Y. Bahadori, U. Hegde, and D.P. Stocker, “Effects of large-scale vortical structures on microgravity
laminar diffusion flames,” AIAA-2000-695, 38th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 10-13
January, 2000.
[11] U. Hegde, M.Y. Bahadori, and D.P. Stocker, Oscillatory temperature measurements in a pulsed
microgravity diffusion flame, AIAA Journal, 38 (7) (2000) 1219-1229.
[12] M.Y. Bahadori and U. Hegde, “Influences of Gravity and Pressure on Pulsed Jet Diffusion Flames,” AIAA2001-0621, AIAA 39th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, 8-11 January, 2001.
[13] J.E. Brooker, D.P. Stocker, and L.-D. Chen, “The Influence of Buoyant Convection on the Stability of
Enclosed Laminar Flames,” Central States Meeting of the Combustion Institute, Lexington, KY, 31 May 2 June, 1998.
[14] J.E. Brooker, K. Jia, D.P. Stocker, and L.-D. Chen, “Influence of Buoyant Convection on the Stability of
Enclosed Laminar Flames,” NASA/CP-1999-209628, Fourth United States Microgravity Payload: One
Year Report (September 1999) pp. 151-159.
[15] K. Jia and L.-D. Chen, “Numerical Simulation of an Enclosed Laminar Jet Diffusion Flame in Microgravity
Environment: Comparison with ELF Data,” AIAA-2000-0693, AIAA 38th Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Reno, NV, 10-13 January, 2000.
[16] R. Venuturumilli, L.-D. Chen, “Comparison of four-step reduced mechanism and starting mechanism for
methane diffusion flames,” Fuel 88 (2009) 1435–1443.
[17] K.T. Dotson, P.B. Sunderland, Z.-G. Yuan, and D.L. Urban, “Laminar Smoke Points of Microgravity
Coflow Diffusion Flames,” Eastern States Meeting of the Combustion Institute, College Park, MD, 18-21
October, 2009.
[18] K.T. Dotson, P.B. Sunderland, Z.-G. Yuan, and D.L. Urban, “Laminar Smoke Points in Coflow Measured
Aboard the International Space Station,” 48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, 4-7
January 2010.
[19] K.T. Dotson, P.B. Sunderland, Z.-G. Yuan, and D.L. Urban, “Laminar Smoke Points of Nonbuoyant
Coflowing Flames,” 6th International Seminar on Fire and Explosion Hazards, Leeds, England, 11-16 April
2010.
[20] K.T. Dotson, P.B. Sunderland, Z.-G. Yuan, D.L. Urban, “Laminar smoke points of coflowing flames in
microgravity,” Fire Safety Journal 46 (2011) 550–555.
[21] B. Ma, S. Cao, D. Giassi, D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, B.A.V. Bennett, M.D. Smooke, and M.B. Long, “An
experimental and computational study on soot formation in a coflow jet flame under microgravity and
normal gravity,” 8th US National Combustion Meeting, Park City UT, 19-22 May, 2013.
[22] S. Cao, B.A.V. Bennett, B. Ma, D. Giassi, D.P. Stocker, F. Takahashi, M.B. Long, and M.D. Smooke,
“Effects of fuel dilution and gravity on laminar coflow methane-air diffusion flames: A computational and
experimental investigation,” 8th US National Combustion Meeting, Park City UT, 19-22 May, 2013.
[23] P.B. Kuhn, B. Ma, B.C. Connelly, M.D. Smooke, and M.B. Long, “Soot and Thin-filament Pyrometry
Using a Color Digital Camera,” Proceedings of the Combustion Institute, 33 (2011) 743-750.
[24] B. Ma, M. B. Long, “Absolute light calibration using S-type thermocouples,” Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute, 34 (2) (2013) 3531-3539.
[25] T.F. O'Malley, W.A. Sheredy, and D.P. Stocker, “Combustion Research on the International Space
Station,” 59th International Astronautical Congress, Vol. 2 (2008) pp. 756-766.
[26] P.S. Greenberg and J.C. Ku, “Soot Volume Fraction Imaging,” Applied Optics, 36 (22) (1997) 5514-5522.
[27] K. McPherson, E. Kelly, and J. Keller, “Acceleration Environment of the International Space Station,”
AIAA-2009-0957, AIAA 47th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, 5-8 January, 2009.

12

Disclaimer
Product references have been included for clarity and do not indicate an endorsement by NASA
or the federal government.

13

