Unmanned Vehicle Material Flammability Test

Olivier Minster and Balazs Toth: ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands
Guillaume Legros: Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
Christian Eigenbrod: University of Bremen (ZARM), Bremen, Germany
Nickolay Smirnov: Moscow Lomonosov State University, Moscow, Russia
Osamu Fujita: Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
Grunde Jomaas: Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

David L. Urban and Gary A Ruff: NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
A. Carlos Fernandez-Pello: UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
James S. T’ien: Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Jose L. Torero University of Queensland, AU
Adam Cowlard: University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Sebastien Rouvreau: Belisama R&D, Toulouse, France

International Topical Team
The experiment is an international collaboration between numerous
space agencies. The collaboration is managed by an International
Topical Team including participation by NASA and ESA, plus a
group of international scientists (pictures below), that aims to
revolutionize spacecraft fire safety designs for next-generation space
vehicles and habitats. It will feature a validation experiment on an
unmanned but pressurized vehicle such as the Orbital Sciences Corp.
Cygnus vehicle after it has completed its supply mission to the
International Space Station.

Problem Identification

Vehicle Configuration

Full scale fire testing complemented by computer modeling has
substantially improved our understanding of the risk, prevention and
suppression of fire in terrestrial systems (cars, ships, planes, buildings,
mines, and tunnels). In comparison, no such testing has been carried out
for manned spacecraft due to the complexity, cost and risk associated
with operating a material flammability experiment of a relevant size
and duration in microgravity. Therefore, there is currently a gap in
knowledge of fire behavior in spacecraft.
Cygnus approaching the ISS

Cygnus in Shroud

NASA Test1 challenges

Flammability limits differ
Cygnus interior

Overpressure Testing and Modeling
The experiment will need to meet rigorous safety requirements to
ensure the carrier vehicle does not sustain damage

Ground Experiments

Experiment Configuration

Critical flux for flame spread

SIBAL before
and after test

Flow

X
Z
Y

Experiment Installed in Cygnus
Thrust vector aligned with x-axis
Foam on both sides and bottom of Saffire

Soot measurements in flame (backlighting technique)

Cutaway view of the flow duct and
avionics enclosure

Parabolic Flight Experiments
A new rig for parabolic flight is being built. Team members will
conduct short duration validation experiments before every
Cygnus flight experiment
Novespace’s plane

Sample Selection
Structured Samples

New combustion chamber

7 cm x 20 cm
sample

Drop Tower Experiments

Flame spread over thin combustible layer with high heat conductivity
inclusions

Streamlines

The Road Ahead
The large-scale material flammability demonstration will facilitate the
understanding of the long-term consequences of a potential spacecraft
fire and provide data not only for the verification of detailed numerical
models of such an event, but also for the development of predictive
models that can assist and optimise fire prevention, response and
mitigation.

Flame velocity versus flow velocity

The first step is to provide an predictive tools that will integrate fire
safety into design and management of space vehicles. Such tools will
integrate a wide range of design issues including, but not limited to,
material selection, emergency response, crew training, post-fire cleanup, fire detection, fire suppression, environmental control and life
support (ECLS) system design, and even atmosphere selection to
provide a globally optimised solution.

Contact David Urban
(david.urban@nasa.gov) and / or Grunde
Jomaas (grujo@byg.dtu.dk) for more
information or to express interest in
participation.

