Sub Topic: Fire Research
9th U. S. National Combustion Meeting
Organized by the Central States Section of the Combustion Institute
May 17-20, 2015
Cincinnati, Ohio

Microgravity Flammability of PMMA Rods in Concurrent Flow
Sandra L. Olson1, Paul V. Ferkul2
1

Combustion Physics and Reacting Systems Branch, NASA Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field, m.
s. 77-5, Cleveland OH, 44135-3127 USA
2
Universities Space Research Association, Advanced Research Associates Office at NASA Glenn
Research Center at Lewis Field, m. s. 110-3, Cleveland OH, 44135-3127 USA
*
Corresponding Author Email: Sandra.Olson@NASA.gov
Abstract: Microgravity experiments burning cast PMMA cylindrical rods in axial flow have been
conducted aboard the International Space Station in the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) facility
using the Burning and Suppression of Solids (BASS) flow duct, as part of the BASS-II experiment.
Twenty-four concurrent-flow tests were performed, focusing on finding flammability limits as a function
of oxygen and flow speed. The oxygen was varied by using gaseous nitrogen to vitiate the working
volume of the MSG. The speed of the flow parallel to the rod was varied using a fan at the entrance to
the duct. Both blowoff and quenching limits were obtained at several oxygen concentrations. Each
experiment ignited the rod at the initially hemispherical stagnation tip of the rod, and allowed the flame
to develop and heat the rod at a sufficient flow to sustain burning. For blowoff limit tests, the astronaut
quickly turned up the flow to obtain extinction. Complementary 5.18-second Zero Gravity Facility drop
tests were conducted to compare blowoff limits in short and long duration microgravity. For quenching
tests, the flow was incrementally turned down and the flame allowed to stabilize at the new flow condition
for at least the solid-phase response time before changing it again. Quenching was observed when the
flow became sufficiently weak that the flame could no longer provide adequate heat flux to compensate
for the heat losses (conduction into the rod and radiation). A surface energy balance is presented that
shows the surface radiative loss exceeds the conductive loss into the rod near the limit. The flammability
boundary is shown to represent a critical Damkohler number, expressed in terms of the reaction rate
divided by the stretch rate. For the blowoff branch, the boundary exhibits a linear dependence on oxygen
concentration and stretch rate, indicating that the temperature at blowoff must be fairly constant. For the
quenching branch, the dominance of the exponential nature of the Arrhenius kinetics reaction rate
indicates that the temperature is critical.
Keywords: Flammability, Microgravity, Rod, Concurrent

1. Introduction
NASA STD 6001 Test 1[1] is the major method used to evaluate flammability of materials
intended for use in habitable environments of U.S. spacecraft. The method is an upward flame
propagation test initiated in a stagnant normal gravity environment and using a well-defined igniter
flame at the bottom of a vertically mounted sample. A material passes this test if the vertical burn
length is less than 15.2 cm (6 inches) and there is no evidence of transfer of burning debris. The
material either passes or fails the test at a given atmosphere (oxygen concentration, pressure). This
test assumes that the 1g upward flame spread is conservative relative to the material’s flammability in
space.
What is problematic with this approach is the assumption that the 1g upward flame spread test
is the worst case for flammability. Recent research has shown that current normal gravity materials
flammability results are not conservative when compared to flammability in ventilated microgravity
1

Sub Topic: Fire Research
or partial gravity conditions. Materials have sustained burning in microgravity at or below the
flammability limits measured with the Test 1 protocol. What if materials are intrinsically more
flammable in space than on earth, due to reduced convective cooling and yet adequate oxygen
ventilation?
As part of the Burning and Suppression –II (BASS-II) experiment, twenty-four concurrent
flow flammability tests with cast PMMA rods were performed in the Microgravity Science Glovebox
(MSG) [2] in the Destiny Lab of the International Space Station (ISS). Twenty-two rods were clear,
and two were black, but no obvious differences between clear and black have been noted to date.
The objective of the BASS-II concurrent rod tests was to obtain the lower portion of the concurrent
microgravity flammability map as a function of ventilation flow and ambient oxygen concentration.
Flame spread along rods with axial flow has been widely studied [3-13]. Most of the work
has been downward flame spread, or opposed flow flame spread. Only a few studies have been
performed in reduced gravity. Tarifa and his colleagues [9] conducted parabolic and sounding rocket
opposed flow flame spread experiments with hollow rods and found that flame extinction depends
considerably on both oxygen concentration and flow velocity, and quenching occurs at low flow
velocities that are on the order of diffusive velocities.
Concurrent flame spread along rods was tested aboard the Mir Space Station in the Skorost
hardware [14]. The extruded PMMA, Delrin, and High Density Polyethylene rods all showed the
same tendency to melt beneath the flame and form accumulating molten balls on the stagnation end
of the rod, with the flame wrapped around the molten ball. At low flows, the small flame at the
stagnation tip of the rod propagated simply through rod regression (bulk burning) rather than through
a concurrent flame spread along the rod.
Rod bulk burning via tip regression is the likely near-limit flame geometry for an axial
concurrent flow along a rod in general, so we proposed to use it to study materials flammability with
a simple axisymmetric geometry with minimal heat losses (surface radiation loss, conduction along
the rod axis, no holder losses). The heat loss can be varied by varying the diameter of the rod, which
effectively changes the surface energy balance term associated with in-depth conduction from the
surface.
2. Experimental Setup
The BASS-II hardware used for these tests is shown inside the MSG working volume in Figure 1.
The BASS-II hardware consists of a flow duct, still camera, video camera, external control box and
associated plumbing and mounting systems. The three primary variables included the working volume
oxygen concentration, the flow velocity through the duct, and the PMMA rod diameter.
The black anodized 7.6 cm x 7.6 cm x 17 cm rectangular flow duct with rounded corners was
originally built to perform gas jet diffusion flame studies [15], and was modified to accommodate solid
samples for the BASS series of experiments. The flow through the duct was generated using a small
fan at the upstream end of the duct. The voltage to the fan was varied to change the flow through the
duct. In addition, up to two additional flow restrictors could be used at the fan inlet to increase the
pressure drop and thus reduce the flow through the duct to the desired value for the test point. The
flow then passed through a honeycomb flow straightener and an inlet screen to reduce swirl. An
omnidirectional spherical air velocity transducer (TSI™1 # 8475) was positioned between the
honeycomb and the screen, and was used to measure the steady-state flow velocity through the duct.
The air velocity transducer probe had a response time of approximately one minute. The fan voltage

TM Mention of trade names or commercial products is for descriptive purposes only and does not constitute endorsement
or recommendation for use by the U.S. Government.
2

Sub Topic: Fire Research
was calibrated with the air velocity transducer reading at the end of every operations day using that
day’s flow restrictor configuration(s).
The test section was 17 cm long. Inside the test section was a nozzle for nitrogen flow to vitiate the
working volume, a moveable scale to provide a reference at the sample plane, and an Oriel™ #71768
thermopile detector with a Calcium Fluoride window with a spectral range of 0.13 to 11 microns in the
downstream top back corner of the duct. The test section of the duct had two orthogonal windows, the
top one being replaced for BASS to provide a mounting rail system for the solid samples. The top
window was used by a Nikon™ D300 12.3 megapixel digital color still camera with a 60 mm lens that
provided 4320 x 2968 pixel images. The duct exit contained a perforated copper plate followed by a
brass screen to provide heat rejection and a cold surface for soot deposition. The flow turned ninety
degrees to exit the duct, which facilitated mixing of the hot combustion gases with the cool ambient
air.

Figure 1. Microgravity Science Glovebox Facility (MSG) working volume aboard the International
Space Station (ISS) with the Suppression of Solids – II (BASS-II) experiment hardware installed.
The front window opened to provide access to the test section for sample and igniter change out.
A Panasonic color video camera WV-CP654 (760 x 480 pixel array) with a turning mirror looked in
the front window. The video camera had a built-in digital overlay that displayed the nitrogen flow rate
(cm3/min), fan voltage (10xV), hot wire anemometer reading (cm/s), and the radiometer signal. The
radiometer signal was not calibrated, but provided a measure of the flame dynamics and steadiness.
The external control box had controls for the fan voltage level, nitrogen flow level, enable switches for
the igniter and nitrogen, and a radiometer gain level setting.
Seventeen clear cast PMMA cylindrical rods of various diameters (11with 1/4”, 4 with 3/8”, and 2
with 1/2” diameters) were burned in a concurrent flow direction. The samples were manually ignited
by the astronaut at the initially hemispherical stagnation tip with a Kanthal™ A-1 29 gauge hot-wire
igniter with a nominal hot wire resistance of 0.8-1 ohms, powered by approximately 3.5-3.8 amps.
Samples are burned within the duct and the combustion products exit the duct and mix with the gas in
the work volume.
To evaluate the levels of combustion products produced during microgravity fires, we used onboard sensors to measure the O2 depletion and the completeness of combustion (CO, CO2). The O2,
CO2, and CO measurements required two portable, battery powered instruments in the working volume
during testing: CDM, and CSA-CP. The oxygen sensor is not recalibrated on orbit, so we also used
3

Sub Topic: Fire Research
the Mass Constituents Analyzer data to determine the oxygen sensor offset on a daily basis. The
resolution of the CSA-CO was 0.1% O2. Oxygen concentrations in the MSG working volume were
varied during the testing from ambient ISS oxygen levels (~ 21% O2) down to ~14% O2 for very nearlimit flames. The CO sensor is zero calibrated every 60 days, with a range of 0-1000 ppm and a
resolution of 1 ppm. The CO2 sensor was within its calibration window, and had a range of 0-5% and
a resolution of 0.1% by volume of CO2.
The sensor data provided initial and final conditions for
repeated tests in a sealed working volume, and allowed us to determine when the working volume
needed to be purged.
To obtain the desired vitiated atmosphere, the MSG working volume was diluted using ISS nitrogen
(hose connecting BASS-II duct to back wall of MSG in Figure 1). The nitrogen was regulated with a
small (< 0.5 LPM) MKS™ 179A mass flow meter and entered the flow duct through a small nozzle
just downstream of the fan in the test section. The fan in the flow duct was turned to maximum (> 100
LPM) during the nitrogen flow to mix and blow the gas into the working volume and circulate it
continuously throughout the hours-long vitiation. We developed a vitiation model [16] based on a
Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) model. This perfect mixing approximation is valid as long
as the residence time (V/r = 500 min) is 5 to 10 times as long as the mixing time, which is easily the
case for the 100 LPM mixing rate (250 L/100 LPM = 2.5 min mixing time). The model was verified
using intermittent on-board oxygen sensor readings during an initial vitiation. This model was then
used to determine the nitrogen flow rate and flow time to achieve the desired oxygen concentration of
the test based upon the initial oxygen concentration reading and operational crew time constraints.
3. Results and Discussion
To start each experiment, the astronaut ignited the rod at the stagnation tip and allowed the flame
to develop and heat the rod axially at a sufficient flow to sustain burning. The time needed to
adequately develop the solid-phase thermal profile is estimated to be when the Fourier number is
approximately equal to 0.3 (Fo= αt/R2~0.3) [17]. For a thermal diffusivity of PMMA=1.2x10-3
cm2/s, the times range from 25 s to 100 s for the different rod radii tested.
3.1 Quenching Extinction
For quenching tests, the flow was incrementally turned down and the flame allowed to stabilize at
the new flow condition for at least the solid-phase response time before changing it again.
Quenching was observed when the levels of forced flow and/or oxygen concentration became
sufficiently weak that the flame could no longer provide adequate heat flux to compensate for the
heat losses (conduction into the rod and radiation). Quench test burns lasted up to 28 minutes. Near
–quenching flames for each rod size are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Representative near-limit flames for each of the three rod sizes tested: left to right R=
1/8” (0.318 cm), 3/16” (0.476 cm), and ¼” (0.635 cm). Flow and oxygen are not the same, but each
represents the lowest oxygen test for that rod size.
4

Sub Topic: Fire Research
3.1 Blowoff extinction
For blowoff limit tests, the astronaut quickly turned up the flow to obtain extinction. The flow at
blowoff was defined by the fan voltage reading at the moment the stagnation region opened up and
the flame moved downstream. The annular flame would oscillate upstream and downstream multiple
times before completely blowing off. Later in the test program, we attempted to re-establish the
stagnation region after local blowoff by quickly reducing the flow to a value below the blowoff
velocity, but we were only successful in one instance where the blowoff of the stagnation region may
not have been complete (flame opening less than a thermal length, perhaps) due to the astronaut’s
quick response time. A subsequent attempt shortly after this was not able to re-establish the
stagnation region, so it seems that once the flame is blown downstream of the stagnation region, the
flame is unable to propagate upstream for the low oxygen levels tested (16.1% O2 and lower). This is
consistent with tests for opposed flow flame spread rods that were also done as part of BASS-II [18],
where flame spread was not observed below 16.4 % O2. Example blowoff images are shown in
Figure 3.
3.2 Drop Tower tests
Complementary 5.18-second Zero Gravity Facility drop tests were conducted to compare blowoff
limits in short and long duration microgravity, using the microgravity wind tunnel drop rig [19]. For
the drop tests, the rod was ignited in normal gravity and allowed to burn and preheat the rod briefly at
a flammable oxygen flow, and then the gas was switched to the test atmosphere and the package
released based on the flow time of the gas to reach the flame zone. The flames in the drop tower
blowoff tests are significantly smaller than the ISS flames, as can be seen in Figure 3. This is most
likely due to the short burn time prior to blowoff, so the rod was not significantly preheated.

Figure 3: Blowoff images for three rod sizes: left to right R= 1/8” (0.318 cm), 3/16” (0.476 cm),
and ¼” (0.635 cm). Center image is of a 5.18-second Zero Gravity Research Center drop test, where
the flame blew off during the drop, since no ISS blowoff tests were obtained with the intermediate
rod size. A green LED illuminates the drop test rod. Flow and oxygen are not the same, but each
represents the lowest oxygen test for that rod size.

5

Sub Topic: Fire Research
3.4 Flammability Boundary
For each test, the flow at which the flames extinguished and the last flow where a stable flame
was observed (or where the flame did not blowout in the drop time for drop tests), along with the
post-burn oxygen reading were used to generate the flammability boundary, shown in Figure 4.
There appears to be a different O2 minimum for the 0.476 cm and 0.635 cm radius rods, which is
attributed to increased solid conductive heat loss for the larger rod cross sectional area.
The thick gray flammability boundary is the border between stable flames and extinguished
flames. It is a stochastic region due to the fact that near the flammability boundary, the flame is
sensitive to perturbations, and a random perturbation of sufficient magnitude will extinguish a flame
in this near-limit region [20]. The gray stochastic boundary is defined by the combined equations
shown by the red and black dashed lines. These dashed lines are based on a critical Damkohler
number analysis, where a critical Damkohler number (Dacrit) is defined as

Figure 4: Flammability boundary obtained in BASS-II tests with concurrent rods of different sizes.
Complementary drop tower test results are also shown. Extinction points (X’s) are color-coded to
indicate rod diameter.
Notice that the black dashed line blowoff boundary in Figure 4 is linear (Yox ~ a), which would
seem to indicate that the dominant parameters for blowoff are these parameters in the Dacrit equation.
This implies that the fuel concentration and the critical temperature are fairly constant in the flame
zone at blowoff where the reactants move so quickly through the reaction zone that they do not have
6

Sub Topic: Fire Research
time to react. The critical temperature for ignition is a well-known concept that can be applied to
blowoff if one considers the fuel and oxidizer to be in a state of continual ignition in the flame zone.
Once the temperature in the flame zone drops below the critical temperature for ignition, the flame
blows off.
The drop tower blowoff data linear curve fit is plotted for comparison, and agrees very well with
the ISS data. This further implies that the different levels of preheating of the rod do not affect
blowoff extinction. The linear blowoff boundary has interesting implications in that it may be
possible to linearly extrapolate blowoff data down to zero stretch rate and use that oxygen value as a
conservative estimate of the minimum oxygen concentration where the material will burn. This will
allow us to de-rate materials based on normal gravity flammability tests to ensure the material will
not burn in space. Using the y-intercept of the linear fit (13.3 % O2 in the Figure 4 fit, versus the
minimum test point of 13.6 % O2) would add a slight level of conservatism.
On the other hand, the quenching branch is captured with a red dashed exponential fit. This
suggests the Arrhenius temperature exponential term is dominant in the quenching region. This is
expected at quenching, where the temperature drops off dramatically while flow time is plentiful.
Heat losses dominate to cool the flame to extinction, as was modeled by [20, 21]. This boundary is
very steep when plotted on a linear x axis as shown in Figure 4. To get the “U”-shaped flammability
boundary, a logarithmic x axis is often used, which expands the quenching branch while making the
linear blowoff branch have a curved shape.
We recognize that the appropriate flow parameter to use to compare data for the different rod
sizes is the flame stretch, which is defined here as sum of the combined flow-induced stretch and the
curvature-induced stretch, or a=af + acurv. The effect of curvature-induced stretch is not negligible
for these small diameter rods at low speed flows, and we combine them in this way following the
example for mixed convection [21]. The initial rod tip is hemispherical, but as it burns it takes on a
slightly more tapered round-nosed shape, as can be seen in Figures 2 and 3. The flow-induced stretch
around the approximately spherical rod tip is af = 3/2 U/R. The curvature-induced stretch around
the hemispherical flames is estimated for the small samples as acurv = [3 U/R] × [(Rflame-R)/R].
The analysis of all the data for flame radius at each limit condition is not yet complete, so Figure
4 currently shows the flammability boundary data plotted as forced stretch rate, with the data points
also marked by rod size. The data points will shift to the right once the curvature-induced stretch is
accounted for. Table 1 gives estimates of the curvature-induced stretch for each radius, based on the
flame radii measured from Figure 2, to give an idea of the magnitude of the shift.
Table 1: Stretch rate estimates for specific tests shown in Figure 2
Rod radius,
af = 3/2 U/R,
acurv = [3 U/R] × [(Rflame-R)/R],
a=af + acurv, s-1
cm
s-1
s-1
0.318
2.36
3.63
5.99
0.476
3.46
4.62
8.08
0.635
3.31
5.38
8.68
3.5 Surface Energy Balance
If we assume for long burn times that the solid phase thermal profile away from the flame tip has
reached an approximate steady state, we can approximate the 1D temperature profile along the rod
axis.
Away from the regressing tip of the rod, there is a balance of heat transfer through the rod
via conduction and convection:
Ts

0 = ρscsVr
+ λs
y
7

2T
s
y2

Sub Topic: Fire Research
The convective term is due to the steady surface regression of the rod (measured from the
experiment), Vr. It is assumed in this steady analysis that Vr is so small that the length of the sample
does not change significantly over the timeframe of interest τ, over which ΔL<<L, where L is the
characteristic length of the rod. This means that changes in the temperature profiles are quasisteady for a slowly changing L.
Boundary conditions include the surface temperature at y=0 is Ts (assumed a constant
pyrolysis temperature) and the ambient temperature at y = L is T . Non-dimensionalizing with
Y=y/L, θ = (T-T )/(Ts-T ), and Pe= LVr/αs we can write
0 = Pe

θs
Y

2θ

s
2
Y

+

The coefficient is a solid-phase Peclet number, which is a ratio of the convective heat
transferred as the fuel regresses, compared to the conductive heat transfer from the hot surface.
Boundary conditions become θ(0)=1 and θ(1)=0. This equation is a linear, homogeneous, second
order ordinary differential equation with constant coefficients, with roots 0 and -Pe for a general
solution
θ(Y) = C1e-PeY +C2e0

Using the boundary conditions to evaluate C1 and C2, we find the solution is

For large Peclet numbers (Pe>1), there is a substantial change in the non-dimensional gradient
due to the increasing exponential nature of the temperature profiles, since heat conducted along the
rod is convected back toward the burning tip so that heat cannot penetrate too deeply along the rod.
For small Peclet numbers (Pe≤1), conduction dominates and the temperature profiles are nearly
linear. It is counter-intuitive that the slowest burning samples will, in this steady-state, have the least
heat loss into the solid, which has been previously noted [23].
We can differentiate the 1D solution to evaluate the steady-state temperature gradient at the
regressing surface (Y=0) with decreasing Peclet number (burning rate). Solving for the temperature
gradient at the surface as a function of Peclet number, we obtain

We can use this to evaluate the conductive loss down the rod as a function of regression rate
(Pe), and estimate the flame heat flux as a function of Peclet number.
The surface energy balance for the rod tip is given by

Where Lvap = 1700 J/g, m” = Vrρ, ε = 0.85, Ts = 300 oC, λs = 2.09 x 10-3 W/cm K at 300 K, λg = 5.77
x 10-4 W/cm K at 800 K, ρ = 1.19 g/cc, L=5.9 cm, and σ = 5.729 x 10-12 W/cm2 K4
Using these values and evaluating the surface temperature gradient as above, we can estimate
each term in the energy equation as a function of the Peclet number in Figure 5. It has been shown
[17] that the burning rate decreases nearly linearly with stretch rate until very near the quenching or
blowoff limits, so Pe ~ a. As mentioned above, solid conduction decreases with decreasing Peclet
number. Surface radiative loss is assumed to be constant. The energy available for fuel vaporization
decreases with decreasing Peclet number, as one would expect. The net flame heat flux thus drops
precipitously with decreasing Peclet number.
8

Sub Topic: Fire Research
We can compare the importance of the different losses by normalizing them with the net
flame heat flux (left side of energy balance, which includes gas-phase conduction and gas radiation).
In Figure 5, the solid conduction, surface radiation, and the combined solid conduction and surface
radiative loss are normalized by the net flame heat flux and are plotted on the right axis. As Peclet
number decreases (rod regression rate decreases as forced stretch rate decreases), the radiative loss
ratio increases dramatically since surface radiative loss is a constant while flame heat flux decreases
linearly with Peclet number. The solid conduction ratio actually falls off as Peclet number is
reduced. The combined radiative and conductive loss ratio increases at low Peclet number, and one
would expect the flame to quench when the combined losses exceed approximately 70% of the net
flame heat flux [24, 25]. The primary reason for quenching is the reduced net heat flux from the
flame compared to the ongoing losses.

Figure 5: Surface Energy Balance terms. As the rod regression rate decreases (Pe decreases, a
decreases), the relative importance of heat losses increases, eventually causing quenching. At
quenching, surface radiation is higher than solid conduction loss, but the primary reason for
quenching is the reduced net heat flux from the flame compared to the ongoing losses.
4. Conclusions
Twenty-four concurrent axial flow flammability tests with three diameters of cast PMMA
cylindrical rods were performed in the MSG on the ISS. Oxygen concentrations in the MSG
working volume were varied during the testing from ambient ISS oxygen levels (~ 21% O2) down to
~14% O2, and oxygen concentrations before and after each test were measured with an on-board
CSA-CP sensor. Flow velocity through the duct was also varied by changing the fan voltage, and
measured with a hot-wire anemometer.
In quenching limit tests, the flow was incrementally turned down and the flame allowed to
stabilize at the new flow condition for at least the solid-phase response time before changing it again.
For blowoff limit tests, the astronaut quickly turned up the flow to obtain extinction. Complementary
5.18 second Zero Gravity Facility drop tests were conducted to compare blowoff limits in short and
long duration microgravity.
9

Sub Topic: Fire Research
A flammability boundary with axes of oxygen concentration and forced stretch rate is obtained
that has a distinctive shape that correlates well with a critical Damkohler number. The blowoff
branch exhibits a linear (Yox ~ a), trend that indicates there is a relatively constant critical
temperature at blowoff. The quenching branch exhibits an exponential (Yox versus a) curve which
reflects importance of heat losses to drop the flame temperature, causing the Arrhenius reaction rate
to slow to a critical Damkohler number while flow time is plentiful. A surface energy balance is used
to show how the reductions in net flame heat flux at low stretch (low regression rates) drives the
flame to quenching extinction despite the fact that the losses actually decrease slightly near the limit.
5. Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the ISS Research Project Office. We want to acknowledge the
invaluable assistance of astronauts Don Pettit, Reid Wiseman and Alex Gerst, who ran the BASS
experiments reported here. This work couldn’t have been done without the intense efforts of the
BASS ops team (Jay Owens, Chuck Bunnell, Tibor Lorik, and Carol Reynolds). We also want to
acknowledge the ground support teams at GRC, JSC, and MSFC that supported the BASS-II
operations.
6. References
1
NASA STD-6001B, 2011.
2
R. A. Spivey, W. A. Sheredy, and G. Flores, 46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit, 7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada, AIAA-2008-812.
3
J. De Ris, A. M. Kanury, and M. C. Yuen, Proc. Comb. Inst. 14 (1973) 1033-1044.
4
M. Sibulkin, and C.K. Lee, Comb. Sci. Tech. 9, (1974)137-147.
5
A. C. Fernandez-Pello, and R. J. Santoro, Proc. Comb. Inst. 17 (1979) 1201-1209.
6
Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Ray, S. R., and Glassman, I., Combust. Sci. Tech. 19 (1978) 19-30.
7
S. R. Ray, Dissertation, Princeton University, 1982.
8
Y. Halli, J. S. T’ien, NBS-GCR-86-507 (1986).
9
C. S. Tarifa, B. Lazaro, First Int’l. Symp. on Microgravity Research and Applications on Physical
Sciences and Biotechnology, 2000.
10
R. O. Weber, and N. J. de Mestre, Comb. Sci. Tech. 70 (1990) 17-32.
11
M.A. Delichatsios, Proc. Comb. Inst. 28 (2000) 2899-2904.
12
M.A. Delichatsios, R.A. Altenkirch, M.F. Bundy, S. Bhattacharjee, L. Tang, and K. Sacksteder,
Proc. Comb. Inst. 28 (2000) 2835–2842.
13
F. J. Higuera, Comb. Theory & Modelling 6 (2002) 197-208.
14
A.V. Ivanov, Ye.V. Balashov, T.V. Andreeva, A.S. Melikhov, NASA–CR–1999–209405 (1999).
15
K.T. Dotson, P.B. Sunderland, Z.G. Yuan, and D.L.Urban, Fire Safety J. 46 (2011) 550-555.
16
S. L. Olson, P. V. Ferkul, S. Bhattacharjee, F. J. Miller, A. C. Fernandez-Pello, S. Link, and J. S.
T’ien, ICES-2015-196, 45th International Conference on Environmental Systems, 12-16 July
2015, Bellevue, Washington.
17
S. L. Olson, Case Western Reserve University Dissertation, May, 1997.
18
S. Link, C. Fernandez-Pello, S. Olson, P. Ferkul, 30th annual meeting of the American Society
for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR), Pasadena, CA, Oct. 23-26, 2014.
19
S. L. Olson, Combustion Science and Technology, 76 (1991) 233-249.
20
J. S. T’ien, Combust. Sci. Tech. 7 (1973), 185-188.
21
D. W. Foutch and J. S. T’ien, AIAA J. 25 (7), (1986), 972-976.
22
T'ien, J. S., Combust. Flame, Vol. 65 (1986) 31-34.
23
Ohtani, H., Akita, K., and Hirano, T., J. Fire Flammability 13 (1982) 203–214.
24
S.L. Olson, T Kashiwagi, O. Fujita, M. Kikuchi, and K. Ito, Combust. Flame 125 (2001) 852-864.
25
J. B. Armstrong, S. L. Olson, and J. S. T'ien, Combust. Flame147 (2006) 262-277.
10

