Flame Retardant Fibers for Human Space Exploration – Past, Present, and Future

Introduction
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has led in the development of unique flame
retardant fibers for human spaceflight since the beginning of the Apollo program.
After the Apollo 1 fire which killed Command Pilot Virgil I "Gus" Grissom, Senior Pilot Edward H. White II,
and Pilot Roger B. Chaffee from cardiac arrest on January 27, 1967, the accident investigators found
severe third degree burns and melted spacesuits on the astronauts bodies. NASA immediately initiated
an extensive research program aimed at developing flame retardant and flame resistant fibers for the
enriched oxygen atmosphere of the Apollo crew cabin. Fibers are flame retardant when they have been
modified by chemical and thermal treatments. Fibers are flame resistant when they are made of
inherently flame resistant materials (i.e. glass, ceramic, highly aromatic polymers).
Immediately after this tragic accident, NASA funded extensive research in specifically developing flame
retardant fibers and fabrics. The early developmental efforts for human spaceflight were for the outer
layer of the Apollo spacesuit. It was imperative that non-flammable fabrics be used in a 100% oxygen
environment. Owens-Corning thus developed the Beta fiber that was immediately used in the Apollo
program and later in the Space Shuttle program.
Aside from the urgent need for protective fabrics for the spacesuit, NASA also needed flame retardant
fabrics for both clothing and equipment inside the spacecraft. From the mid-1960s to the early 1980’s,
NASA contracted with many companies to develop inherently flame retardant fibers and flame
retardant finishes for existing fibers. Fluorocarbons and aromatic polyamides were the polymers of
great interest for the development of new inherently flame retardant fibers for enriched oxygen
environments. These enriched environments varied for different space programs. For example, the
Apollo program requirements were for materials that would not support combustion in a 70%/30%
oxygen/nitrogen environment at 6.3 pounds per square inch (psi). The Skylab program flammability
requirements were set at 80%/20% oxygen/nitrogen ratios at 5 psi.
While many fibers produced under several NASA contracts were never used, a few have become
commercial products. The intent of this paper is to present the developmental history of some of these
new or modified textile fibers. These developmental efforts are presented at various levels of details
depending on the source of the historical records.
Development of Beta Fiber
“With the Apollo Program which started in 1961 and ended in 1972, unique requirements for
strength, flame resistance, and drape (a characteristic of flexibility and suppleness) were imposed on
textiles used in spacecraft and in the lunar environment. In order to accommodate these extreme
conditions, Owens-Corning, under NASA contract, developed the extra fine filament fiber, Beta
Fiberglass®. “This inorganic fiber is nonflammable in a 100% oxygen environment. It has a service
temperature between -300ºF and 900ºF (-184ºC and 482ºC) and is degraded at 1550ºF (843ºC). The
unique characteristic of Beta fiber was an extremely fine diameter of 3.5 to 3.8 microns resulting in low
bending stiffness, a necessary condition for making fabrics with high drape. In today’s textile terminology
the “Beta fiber”, as it has become to be known in the aerospace industry, would be called a microfiber.
1

With further enhancement through the addition of Teflon coating, Beta multifilament yarns became
easier to weave, and the overall abrasion resistance of the glass fabrics was also improved. The enhanced
Beta Fiberglass® fabric, more than any other fabric, has been used throughout the Apollo and Space
Shuttle programs. The woven Beta fabrics were selected for the outer layer of Apollo space suits and
flight suits, for the interior liner of the Apollo command module, and for several crew equipment items
and fire protective covers. The largest use of Beta fabric in the Space Shuttle Program’s Orbiter was the
contamination control cover of the cargo bay. Between 1967 and 1990 approximately 10,450 lb. of Beta
fabrics were used in the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, Space Shuttle, and Spacelab programs combined.
Today, with the International Space Station, the need for glass fibers is even greater than before, due to
the long exposure of materials to space radiation and space particles. Glass and ceramic structures have
excellent resistance to the atomic oxygen present in Low Earth orbit, whereas atomic oxygen will provoke
the inevitable degradation of organic materials over time. On the other hand, the need for the original
Beta fiber is gone because glass fabrics are no longer used in the space suit. By the mid 1990’s, Owens
Corning or Dodge Fibers in Hoosick Falls, NY (Oak Fluorglas Division) could no longer sustain the
production of a material that had one customer. The need to tailor a garment out of glass fabric ended
after the Apollo program. A new spacesuit had been developed for the Space Shuttle program. This space
suits would be used for several missions as opposed to Apollo suits made for each mission.” (Orndoff,
2016)
Development of Aromatic Polyamide Fiber for Enriched Oxygen Environment from the 1960s to the
1990s
In 1969, The NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston contracted with the Monsanto Research
Corporation, a Subsidiary of Monsanto Co. Dayton Laboratory to develop, test, and modify flame
resistant fibrous materials (John Mann Butler, Albert Y. Garner, Archie E. Follett, Monsanto Research
Corporation). The Monsanto Research Corporation chemists were tasked with developing polymers
which were inherently nonflammable in pure oxygen atmosphere at 6.2 and 16.5 psia.
The goal of this project was to develop a non -flammable fiber with mechanical properties similar to
those of nylon. The initial effort consisted in preparing highly halogenated aromatic polyesters,
determine their solubility, cast films, and test their flammability in an oxygen atmosphere at 6.2 psia.
Several polymers were produced by interfacial polymerization. The first film successfully that was cast
from poly-tetrabromobisphenol-A-chloromethylphosphonate was tested for flammability. However,
this film manufacturing success did not translate into a fiber spinning success. The films were either
nonflammable and insoluble or soluble and flammable. In addition to solubility which is needed for
fiber spinning, infusibility was also needed to avoid dripping of the polymer when it was heated. Hence,
different co-polymers were developed.
The researchers found that co-polymers containing 20% to 50% tetrabromodihydroxybenzophenone, in
contrast to the polytetrabromobisphenol carbonates, were soluble, and could be extruded into thin
films and fibers. While this result was promising, solubility, flammability, and strength of some of the
new materials were still major issues.
After this period of research, because of the problems of solubility associated with the first polymer, the
research shifted towards the synthesis of nitrogen-containing polymers because of the solubility
problems associated with the first polymers. A series of aromatic polyamides and polyimides were
synthetized and tested for flammability. The researchers found that while the monomers should be
2

highly halogenated, it was not necessary that they be completely halogenated. The halogenated
polyimides had low molecular weight and formed friable films. Among the halogenated polyamides, the
brominated analog of Nomex, poly(4,6-dibromo-m-phenylene-4,6-dibromoios-phtalamide), had the
good linear symmetry and chain packing needed for fiber formation.
By the end of the contract 59 different polymers had been produced and tested. Poly(4,6-dibromo-mphenylene-4,6-dibromoiso-phtalamide) or tetrabromo-Nomex and poly(4,6-dibromoisophtalic
anhydride.) were found to be the most promising for producing strong films and fibers.
Work on the halogenated aromatic polyamides continued with another contract with NASA (Robert
Cass, Monsanto Research Corporation, 1972). The general goal of this contract was to further develop
flame resistant organic fabrics. The specific objective was to develop a treatment for various textile
structures made of aromatic polyamides and polybenzimidazole (PBI).
During this research effort, different compounds were evaluated and two new polymers were
introduced as binders, Fluorel and Kel-F. Three additives were also evaluated: Dechlorane Plus 251,
Firemaster 45 BT2, and Hexabromobenzene3. Kel-F appeared to be a better binder because it is
hydrogen-free. However, its viscosity made it more difficult to formulate into a coating. A higher
concentration of Dechlorane was required with Fluorel than with Kel-F in order for the film to be selfextinguishing.
Research continued using various combinations of phosphorus oxyhalide and thermal treatments on
commercially available aromatic polyamide fabrics. The flammability and mechanical properties of
these fabrics were satisfactory.
Following these efforts, a series of other contracts with Monsanto and Albany International Research
Company led to more improvements in the treatments of aromatic polyamide such that a variety of new
fabrics were produced first for evaluation at NASA, and later use in Skylab.
Development of Polybenzimidazole Fibers
The development of polybenzimidazole fibers was performed by Hoechst Celanese under US
government contracts from the Department of Defense and NASA. This work led to the production of
PBI multifilament and staple fibers used in several space programs. Yarns made of multifilament fibers
were used in tethers, belts, and restraints in the Apollo program. Staple fibers were used in many
applications ranging from apparel fabrics for use in Skylab to stowage partitions in the Space Shuttle
program.
Development of Chlorofluoroethylene (CTFE/TFE) Fibers
During the early 1970’s NASA contracted several companies to develop flame resistant fibrous materials.
Under contract number NAS 9-12257, the Plastics Division of Allied Chemical Corp. developed
experimental copolymers of Chlorofluoroethylene (CTFE) and tetrafluoroethylene (TFE) that could

1

Hooker Industrial Chemicals
Michigan Chemical Company
3
Michigan chemical Company
2

3

potentially be spun into fibers and monofilaments. The objective of the contract was to produce yarns
that could meet the NASA/Apollo program flammability requirements at 70/30% O2/N2 ratios at 6.2 psi.
The first spinning trials made by Allied Chemical Corp. were successful. This allowed Fabric Research
Laboratories in Dedham, MA, under NASA contract No. NAS9-13673, to produce an experimental
quantity of CTFE/TFE copolymer.
NASA Thus led the development of flame resistant fibrous materials under Contract NAS 9-12418. The
focus of this effort was to produce the optimum multifilament and monofilament yarns made of the
new CTFE copolymer developed by Allied Chemical Corp.
Development of Polyimide Fiber
With the advent of Upjohn 2080 polyimide resin in mid-1974 {US patent No. 3,708,458} by the Upjohn
Company, D.S. Gilmore Laboratories, Industrial Division, North Haven, Connecticut, NASA initiated the
research for the development of polyimide fibers. NASA contracted Southern Research Institute
(contract No. NAS9-14475, Contract period: February 10, 1975 to October 19, 1976) to develop the
technology for processing fine denier continuous filament fiber from the 2080 polyimide resin.
Under this contract, Southern Research Institute was required to produce continuous fibers that could
be bundled into multifilament yarns, and had the following properties:
1. Physical and Mechanical Properties
a. 2.2, 4.4. and 6.6 dtex (2, 4, and 6 Denier)
b. 4.4-5.5 grams per dtex (4-5 grams per denier) breaking tenacity
c. 15% to 35% elongation
2. Flammability
a. Non-burning or self-extinguishing when tested in accordance with a 10.0 psia and 31%
O2-69% N2 environment per category A, NHB 8060.1A
b. Off-gassing, toxicity, and odor acceptable per NHB 8060.1A
c. Stability in vacuum acceptable per SP-R-0022
The development was done is three phases: fiber development, resin pigmenting and fiber dyeing, and
fibrous structures development.
The fiber development effort consisted in experimenting with both dry and wet spinning methods. In
addition, post-drawing treatments were investigated to estimate a range of applications of the new
fiber. Resin pigmenting and fiber dyeing were evaluated for the same reason. Finally, yarns and fabrics
were produced for testing.
Since the Upjohn polyimide resin had good retention of its tensile strength at high temperature, a
Limiting Oxygen Index of 40, and a specific gravity less than of CTFE copolymer, it was expected that the
fiber would had many NASA applications.
Under contract with Albany International Research Co. (Contract No. NAS9-13673)4, pilot plant
quantities of continuous filament yarns in various deniers were produced as well as cut staple fibers.
The staple fibers could be spun into yarns on commercial equipment. Consequently, tapes, braids,
4

Albany International Research Co. (formerly Fabric Research Laboratories, Inc.) operates as a subsidiary
of Albany International Corp.
4

knitted and woven fabrics were produced in sufficient quantity for evaluation at the Johnson Space
Center. Last, dyes and finishes were applied to the fabrics in an effort to provide a range of colors for
astronaut’s clothing.
The last of fiber research effort in the 1990s was driven by the need to have films and fabrics that could
resist the atomic oxygen present in Low Earth Orbit. One fiber, TOR™, a co-polymer of polyimide, was
developed by Triton Systems Inc. (TSI) for that purpose. The small and newly founded company
received funding from NASA in 1992 in response to the findings from the Long Duration Exposure Facility
(LDEF). After the LDEF was retrieved from its six years in space, NASA scientists found that virtually all
polymeric materials exposed to ultraviolet radiation and atomic oxygen were severely degraded. The
LDEF findings raised concerns about using new polymer composite materials in the future space station.
TOR™ is a space durable polymer that can withstand the damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation and
atomic oxygen as well as extreme thermal cycles. In 1996, TOR™ thin films were flown on the MIR
station as part of the Passive Optical Sample Assembly (POSA-I) experiment. After this experiment, 2
grams per denier (18 grams per tex) fibers were developed for making sewing threads, braided and
woven fabrics.
These polyimide fabrics are not used in the International Space Station program. On the other hand,
expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (E-PTFE) and polybenzimidazole (PBI) fibers have been used since
they were developed, fabrics made with these fibers have been used in all NASA space programs until
the International Space Station program.
The International Space Station Period
Many other fabrics were developed over the 56 years of human spaceflight. For the most part, these
fabrics were made of blended yarns in an attempt to combine properties from their different
components. For example, polybenzoxazole (PBO) was blended with Nomex or polyimide (P84) for
improving its abrasion resistance. Similarly, Beta Fiberglass® yarns were blended with various polymeric
fiber yarns to obtain core/sheath type fabrics which have a good combination of flame resistance, UV
and atomic oxygen resistance, as well as other desired mechanical properties. These blended fabrics are
examples of the continuous research effort at NASA for developing fabrics for use in extreme
environments.
Human Exploration of Deep Space in the 2030s?
Unfortunately, the resources available to NASA for a trip to Mars cannot compare to those used to
enable the landing on the Moon. Fifty years ago the textile industry produced, exclusively for NASA,
fibers and fabrics specifically needed to go to the moon. The US government, in the geopolitical context
of the 1960s, created a favorable environment to encourage the industry to produce new textile fibers
for protective applications.
The textile fiber manufacturers, in addition to conducting research for the US government, invested
some of their resources to build plants to produce the most promising new fibers. Owens-Corning built
a two-story plant to draw, with the assistance of gravity, the Beta fiber to micrometer scale. Likewise,
Hoechst-Celanese dedicated an entire facility to produce PBI filaments.
Fibers like the Beta glass have disappeared because they were no longer needed for industrial or apparel
applications. The Beta fiber developed for a one-time-use protective outer layer of the Apollo spacesuit
was too expensive for use in the market of protective fabrics. Other glass fibers, not quite as fine as
5

Beta, satisfy our current commercial applications. Likewise, PBI staple fiber yarns blended with other
flame retardant yarns satisfy the demand of today’s protective clothing markets.
NASA will need new fibers and fabrics for living in the Orion capsule and for residing in a habitat on the
Martian surface. The fibers that are needed will have to meet additional requirements for missions of
long duration over three years. The astronauts apparel will have to meet not only flammability
requirement but also comfort, aesthetic, and other functional requirements. There will be new logistical
requirements that did not exist in previous space programs. Today, all astronauts’ apparel is disposed of
after a short usage period without laundering capability. The same practice represents an unaffordable
logistical burden for long human space missions.
With the commercialization of space and the beginning of space tourism, a new industry is growing and
needs the same materials NASA is using. There may be new incentives for the textile industry to invest in
supporting the aerospace industry, and lead new fiber developments to open the door of a new market
sector of space explorers.

References
John Mann Butler, Albert Y. Garner, Archie E. Follett, Monsanto Research Corporation. (1970).
Flamwproof Fibrous Material. Dayton, Ohio.
Orndoff, E. (2016). Fabrics for Space Travel. In E. b. Winton, Textile Technology and Design (pp. 171-179).
New Yark: Bloomsbury Academic.
Robert Cass, Monsanto Research Corporation. (1972). Contract NAS 9-10384, Development of
Flameproof Organic Fabric. Dayton, Ohio.

6

