70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

Characterization and Measurement of Spacecraft Airborne Particulate Matter
Marit E. Meyera*
a

NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, Ohio USA 44135, marit.meyer@nasa.gov
* Corresponding Author
Abstract
The International Space Station (ISS) gives a 6-member astronaut crew the ability to live and work in low Earth
orbit. It is a unique indoor environment, which has served as both home and workplace to over 230 people since the
year 2000. In this low gravity environment, smoke does not rise and cookie crumbs do not settle the way they do on
Earth, causing airborne particulate matter, or aerosols, to behave differently and pose unique hazards for crew
members. In its existence, virtually the same volume of ISS air has been continuously conditioned and ‘revitalized,’
including the removal of particles by filtration. While gaseous constituents of ISS air are monitored meticulously,
sparse data exists on the indoor aerosols. The quantity and types of ISS airborne debris have been investigated in
NASA’s Aerosol Sampling Experiment. Both active and passive samplers successfully collected airborne particulate
matter in U.S. segments of the ISS, which were returned to Earth for characterization by microscopy and other
techniques. The resulting data has informed the design of candidate particle instruments for spacecraft. In 2020, a
reference-quality aerosol instrument will be flown to ISS, and will provide real-time data of particle concentrations
in various modules. Smaller, more compact instruments will be necessary in future space missions, for example, in
smaller vehicles, in habitats on lunar and planetary surfaces with ubiquitous dust, and also for use as wearable
technology throughout missions. Miniaturized aerosol sensors, though lower fidelity than reference-quality
instruments, can monitor the environment well when calibrated appropriately. Indoor air quality in spacecraft is
fundamentally important to human health and comfort, and several particulate monitoring technologies will be at
sufficient technology readiness levels for operational use within the next two years. Results of the Aerosol Sampling
Experiment will be presented, along with the status of NASA’s aerosol instrument technology demonstrations on
ISS.
Keywords: aerosol, particle, spacecraft cabin, air quality
Acronyms/Abbreviations
ADI – Aerosol Dynamics, Inc.
APT – Applied Particle Technology
AST – Access Sensor Technologies
COTS – commercial off-the-shelf
CSU – Colorado State University
CTB - Cargo Transfer Bag
EDS – Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
ESAP – Earth and Space Air Prize
FOD - Foreign object debris
HEPA - High efficiency particulate air
ISS - International Space Station
MAGIC - moderated aerosol growth with internal
water cycling
MARS - Mobile Aerosol Reference Sensor
NOAA - National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
PM2.5 – Particle mass concentration for all particles
2.5 micrometres and smaller
PM10 – Particle mass concentration for all particles
10 micrometres and smaller
PMM - Permanent Multipurpose Module
POPS – Portable Optical Particle Spectrometer
SBIR – Small business innovative research
SD – Secure digital

SEM – Scanning Electron Microscope
TEM – Transmission Electron Microscope

1. Introduction
The quality of the air on a spacecraft has direct
consequences for the health and well-being of the crew.
The current mitigation technique for airborne particulate
matter, or aerosols, in the air of the International Space
Station (ISS) is high efficiency particulate air (HEPA)
filtration. This is generally successful, but since
humans and equipment are sources of aerosols, there
can be localized higher concentrations. On Earth,
gravity causes larger particles to settle, so under normal
circumstances, humans do not have to contend with
particles on the order of 100 µm in the breathing zone.
In low gravity, however, particles of this size will
remain airborne and follow the air flow patterns of the
air handling system until they are deposited on surfaces
and air intake vents.
At the outset of ISS filtration system design,
potential aerosols were inventoried [1] and then updated
for additional known particle sources with rates taken
conservatively from the indoor air and building science
literature, which are based on data from Earth research

Page 1 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

studies [2]. Vacuum bag debris provided additional
information on ISS aerosols [3], and returned hook and
loop fasteners were tested for aerosol emissions [4].
These fasteners had resided on ISS and collected
airborne material which was embedded in the hooks,
thus allowing ISS particles (from the fasteners
themselves, as well as other debris) to be generated and
measured in ground experiments. More complete
characterization of ISS cabin particulate matter was
necessary, so the Aerosol Sampling Experiment was
designed and took place in Increment 50/51 on the ISS
in December 2016. A repeat of the experiment has been
completed on ISS in Increment 56, in 2018 and the
analysis of the second set of samples is complete.

designed large-scale mixing pattern required to
eliminate CO2 pockets. However, exceptions were
granted for this experiment in order to obtain valuable
information on the state of the air quality on ISS.
Passive samplers were deployed in the U.S. Lab (2
locations), Node 1, Node 2, Node 3 (2 locations), and
the Permanent Multipurpose Module (PMM).
Locations were chosen to capture particles during crew
exercise, in the hygiene area, near a hatch opening from
a visiting vehicle, and in a storage area (to compare
particle numbers with locations with regular human
traffic).

2.

Experimental
The Aerosol Sampling Experiment has provided the
bulk of the current information on airborne particulate
matter in the spacecraft cabin. Two types of samplers
were deployed in multiple locations to collect particles
in two different size ranges.
2.1 Passive Aerosol Sampling
The Passive Aerosol Sampler design was created for
this experiment by RJ Lee Group * with the goal of
intercepting the flow path of dirty air flowing into the
ISS vents, and collecting particles for up to five
different sampling durations in the same location.
Particles landed on five removable 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm
aluminium substrates covered with double coated black
carbon conductive tape (Ted Pella, Inc., P/N 16084-8).
The passive sampler is shown in Fig. 1, in the US Lab,
where it is mounted on the edge of the HEPA filter
intake. Further details on passive sampling hardware
can be found in reference [5].
The optimal sampling duration to get particle
coverage appropriate for microscopic analysis varies by
ISS location, so multiple substrates in one sampler
provided different particle loadings to choose from as
well as redundancy to reduce risk. Operations in
Increment 50/51 collected particles for 2, 4, 8, 16 and
32 days with the ideal samples in the 8, 16 and 32-day
durations. The operations in Increment 56 were
simplified, with all substrates exposed for 26 days in
order to collect larger amounts of particles for better
statistics.
The passive aerosol samplers (each identified by a
letter) were on vents and filters which are normally
keep-out zones for equipment, in order to maintain the
*

Certain commercial software, equipment, instruments, or materials
are identified in this paper to foster understanding. Such identification
does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), nor does it imply that
the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available
for the purpose.

Fig. 1. Passive Sampler J is mounted on the edge of the
HEPA filter in the US Lab in ISS during the Aerosol
Sampling Experiment in Increment 50/51

2.2 Active Aerosol Sampling
The Active Aerosol Sampler is a commercial offthe-shelf (COTS) instrument created by RJ Lee Group,
which uses thermophoresis to capture particles down to
the nanometre range, directly on Transmission Electron
Microscope (TEM) grids. The compact size (122 mm ×
63 mm × 38 mm) and low-gravity compatible operation
were distinguishing features for selection of this
instrument over other aerosol samplers.

Fig. 2. The Active Aerosol Sampler is the modified
COTS TPS100™ Personal Nanoparticle Sampler
Some modifications were necessary to adapt the
sampler for space flight (Fig. 2), including addition of a

Page 2 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

heat sink and fan, and custom firmware for ISS
operation. Further details on the instrument can be
found in reference [6]. Active samplers were deployed
near most passive samplers for six to eight hours to
sample the same air at one point during the passive
sampling.
3. Results
The final analyses of the second round of the
Aerosol Sampling Experiment was completed by RJ
Lee Group. This included a complete microscopic
survey of the seven passive samplers and active sampler
TEM grids deployed in 2018. Details of the computercontrolled microscopy analysis is given in references
[6,7]. Select individual particles were imaged using
backscattered-electron SEM and the elemental
compositions were determined using Energy Dispersive
X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS).

particle morphology is indicative of mechanical
abrasion, as striations are visible. This particle is on the
order of 80 µm by 50 µm (about the diameter of a
human hair), and while it is not respirable, as foreign
object debris (FOD) it would be an eye hazard.
The salt particles in Figure 4 were sampled in Node
1 where crewmembers eat meals. The salt that is
provided as a condiment on orbit is in liquid form,
because granulated salt cannot be applied to food in a
low gravity environment. The liquid salt application
produces micro-droplet ejections [8] which float into the
cabin and evaporate, producing cubic salt crystals.

3.1 Typical Particles Sampled on ISS
Typical ISS particle types sampled in both
increments include metal wear particles (Fig. 3),
fiberglass fibres (Fig. 6), cubic salt particles (Fig. 4),
and silver dendrites (Fig. 5).

Fig. 3. Stainless steel particle (containing elements
iron, nickel and chromium) collected in Node 3 during
Increment 56
The stainless steel particle in Fig. 3 was sampled in
Node 3, where there are two different exercise devices.
Metal-on-metal contact between moving parts causes
mechanical abrasion and produces particles. These
emissions are ongoing during waking hours, as
crewmembers must exercise two hours per day. The

Fig. 4. Cubic salt particles (containing sodium and
chlorine) collected in Node 1 during Increment 56
The silver particle in Figure 5 has unique
morphology compared to other metal particles sampled.
Multiple silver dendrite particles were sampled in both
increments of the Aerosol Sampling Experiment. All
silver particles sampled have sulphur present in the EDS
spectra, as silver has a high affinity for sulphur.
These particle types were known to be in the Space
Shuttle, as well [9]. Debris obtained from both ground

Page 3 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

samples and tape samples collected during flight had
fiberglass and metal particles, which led to remedial
actions, such as redesign, materials controls and process
changes. The ground support equipment and processes
that took place in the vehicle before launch were easily
overhauled in the Shuttle program, however, on ISS, the
ongoing ambient sources of particles in the cabin far
outweigh the quantities that may be contributed from
ground operations with respect to visiting vehicles.

Fig. 6. Human skin flake collected in Node 3 during
Increment 56, with signature elements carbon, sulphur,
chlorine and potassium. The straight white rod in the
lower left is a fiberglass fibre, recognizable by the
signature elements aluminium, silicon and calcium.
Fig. 5. Silver dendrite with trace sulphur, collected
in Node 1 during Increment 56

3.2 Human-emitted Particle Types Sampled on ISS
Particle emissions from humans themselves
comprised the largest fraction of collected particles,
including skin flakes (Fig. 6), antiperspirant particles
(Fig. 7) and clothing lint fibres (Figs. 8 and 9).
Figure 6 is a typical human skin flake, collected in
Node 3 where crew exercise and hygiene take place. It
has a thin wrinkled morphology, and the EDS spectrum
shows carbon, sulphur, chlorine and potassium, which
are indicative of human biology.
The particle in Fig. 7 has an EDS spectrum with
elements aluminium, chlorine, and zirconium. This is
the compound aluminium zirconium tetrachlorohydrex,
which is the active ingredient in antiperspirant products.
The particle was collected in Node 3, where
antiperspirant is logically abundant in exercise and
hygiene activities. Antiperspirant particles may be
emitted during exercise, or while using wipes after
exercising, in addition to the original application of the
product. In the absence of laundry on ISS, the crew
members wear clothing repeatedly, including exercise
wear, before disposing of them in the trash. Thus,
deodorant particles embedded in the fabric can be
liberated and re-entrained into the cabin air when
donning and doffing clothing. Antiperspirant particles
are abundant in sampling results from all ISS locations.

Fig. 7. Antiperspirant particle containing elements
aluminium, chlorine and zirconium, sampled in Node 1
during Increment 56
Clothing lint fibres are the most ubiquitous and
abundant airborne particulate matter category on ISS.
Figure 8 shows a portion of a passive sampling substrate
which was exposed for 32 days in Node 3 during
Increment 51/52. The large quantity of lint fibres

Page 4 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

creates difficulties for microscopic analysis and image
analysis of the samples, as the fibres overlap other
particles and cross over each other. The choice of
which passive sampling substrate to use for various
microscopic analyses was heavily dependent on the
quantity of fibres collected.

Fig. 8. Passive sampling substrate exposed for 32 days
in Node 3 has multiple types of lint fibres, sampled in
during Increment 51/52
The fibre examples in Fig. 9 include both cotton lint
(the narrow grey fibre in the upper portion of the image)
and a synthetic fibre. Cotton fibres are flat, having a
twisted shape, with diameters between 10 to 20
micrometres. The U.S. crewmembers are supplied with,
and generally prefer cotton clothing which is COTS.
Some synthetic fibre clothing is used, particularly for
exercise, and also Nomex cloth is used for many
applications, such as acoustic insulation (on walls of
modules) and Cargo Transfer Bags (CTB).
The larger diameter fibre in Fig. 8 has a silver
coating, and is from a specialty sock, trade name XStatic®, which contains silver-coated nylon fibres. The
silver coating gives the fibres antimicrobial properties
and therefore may control odours. Figure 9 shows a
close-up of the coating in the lower image, and it is
evident that the silver has worn off in some locations,
no doubt generating silver aerosols on ISS at some time
in the past. X- Static® socks are not commonly used on
ISS at this time, and the sampled fibre may be an
artefact from prior increments.
Reference [9] includes results from the Space
Shuttle fibre analysis which found cotton, wool and
polyester (from garments) as well as fiberglass and
Nomex fibres (from equipment). The number of cotton
fibres that were counted (from crew clothing) typically
exceeded other sources by a factor of 100 or more.
Obtaining laundry capabilities for future missions may
help reduce lint emissions in the spacecraft cabin, as
well as choosing high quality fabrics and pre-washing
garments.

Fig. 9. Clothing lint fibres sampled in the Node 1 during
Increment 51/52

3.3 Particles Collected with the Active Sampler on ISS
Active sampling did not collect large quantities of
particles, and generally, the TEM grids had less than 1%
particle coverage from a total of approximately 3.5 litres
of sampled air. The smallest particles collected by the
active samplers include titanium dioxide agglomerates
(Fig. 10) and metal fume-like agglomerates (Fig. 11).
An example of a titanium dioxide particle is shown
in Figure 10. These were found in all sampling
locations of ISS. Most were agglomerated with primary
particle sizes ranging from 60 to 100 nm in diameter
and total diameters ranging from approximately 150 nm
to 600 nm. Titanium dioxide is used in many consumer
products including food, personal care products,
clothing, paper, plastics, and paints. Many of the
particles were collected in Node 3, which is adjacent to
the Cupola windows. Crewmembers are advised to
wear sunscreen (a known source of titanium dioxide)
when near windows.

Page 5 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

4. Aerosol Instruments for Spacecraft Cabin Particle
Measurements
The characterization of ISS aerosols through active
and passive particle collection with sample return has
shed light on the types of airborne particles in the
spacecraft cabin. The morphology and composition of
many particles has allowed the identification of
emission
sources,
however,
defining
actual
concentrations from the results is not possible.
Therefore, the next step and ultimate goal of NASA is
to measure particles in real-time with instruments
suitable for the low gravity environment.

Fig. 10. Titanium dioxide agglomerate with primary
particle sizes from 100 nm to 210 nm sampled in the US
Lab during Increment 51/52
Figure 11 is an iron fume-like particles with zinc.
Other sampled particles of this type were iron/copper,
iron/chromium or iron/copper/chromium. Unlike the
mechanically generated metal particles on the passive
samplers (such as Fig. 3), the morphology of fume-like
particles consists of spherical primary particles that
have been generated by the heating of material. When a
metal is subjected to high enough temperatures it
vaporizes.
When the vapor cools, spherical
nanoparticles are formed by nucleation processes (due
to surface tension) and subsequently grow larger by
condensation.
When present in localized high
concentrations, the individual particles agglomerate,
which reduces the number concentration and increases
the average particle diameter significantly. The fumelike agglomerate particles sampled had primary particle
sizes ranging from 3 to 20 nm in diameter and
agglomerate diameters ranging from approximately 50
nm to 200 nm. The sources of these particles have not
been identified.

Fig. 11. Iron and zinc-rich agglomerate with primary
particle size from 5 nm to 40 nm sampled in Node 3
during Increment 56

4.1 Real-time particle measurements
Developing the optimal aerosol instrument depends
on knowing the types and sizes of aerosols to be
measured. Aerosol instruments often rely on light
scattering or other indirect measurement techniques
which may have limitations such as dependence on a
certain morphology or material. For example, particles
that are flakes or fibres scatter light differently than
spheres. Refractive index is a factor for darker
materials whereby a portion of incident light is
absorbed, reducing the quantity of light scattered vs. a
lighter particle material. Furthermore, different
measurement techniques are required for different size
ranges of aerosols, which is particularly important in the
spacecraft cabin environment which includes a large
fraction of particles on the order of tens to hundreds of
micrometres.
The Aerosol Sampling Experiment
provided information on particle sizes, shapes and
materials, which has been taken into account during the
instrument selection and development process.
The NASA Life Support Systems project has sought
instruments that measure indoor aerosols in spacecraft
cabins to monitor air quality and for characterizing the
background particle environment and major particle
sources.
This effort was accomplished through
competitive means, such as the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) program. Businesses with
500 or fewer employees in the United States can
propose to win government funding to perform research
and development on technologies which are stated
agency needs, particularly if the products have potential
for future commercialization.
Currently, three different aerosol instruments are
under development for space flight demonstrations on
ISS.

4.2 Reference-quality Instrument for Mapping ISS
Particle Concentrations
The Airborne Particulate Monitor (APM) will be the
first real-time reference-quality particle measuring
instrument on the ISS. It is funded by an SBIR Phase
IIX grant, which covers all costs for flight hardware to

Page 6 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

be built by the company Aerosol Dynamics, Inc. (ADI).
It also covers their subcontract with the hardware
integrating company, ZIN Technologies for associated
safety and flight documentation. The APM combines
two instruments which enables it to measure both
ultrafine and coarse particles. The smallest particles
will be measured by the ADI instrument, MAGIC
[10,11], which stands for “moderated aerosol growth
with internal water cycling,” which has become a
commercialized product since the NASA SBIR
investment. The space-friendly MAGIC prototype
resulting from the SBIR phase I and II grants is a
condensation particle counter with no liquid reservoir.
It can be used in any orientation. This instrument will
be combined with a COTS optical particle counter (the
Portable Optical Particle Counter [POPS], by Handix
Scientific) [12,13]. The POPS (originally funded by
United States federal agency NOAA and NASA Upper
Atmosphere Research Program) has been used on
unmanned aerial vehicles and weather balloons to
provide aerosol particle number density and size
distribution measurements in atmospheric aerosol
research campaigns.
The APM measures 13 cm × 28 cm × 35.5 cm and is
shown in Fig. 12. It has a specially designed virtual
impactor inlet to separate the particles by size for each
instrument. First, a screen stops the largest particles and
debris. This screen can be cleaned if necessary, and is
not likely to be obstructed, as the area is a 5 cm
diameter circle. After the screen, the flow is split into a
large stream with 90% of the inlet air, and a minor flow
stream with 10% of the air flow. The major flow takes
the smallest particles to MAGIC, while the minor flow
concentrates the larger particles for the POPS.
The output data from the APM is merged from the
two instrument data streams and then is written to an SD
card, while the APM display shows the crew only a
particle number concentration for the entire size range
of particles measured. The data will be transferred from
the SD card and downlinked regularly during the ISS
deployments, which will provide a rich data set
including temperature, relative humidity, particle
concentration for sizes from 5 nm to 2 micrometres, and
a particle size distribution for particles from 1 to 20
micrometres. The size distribution is particularly
important and will allow for the comparison of data
from the Aerosol Sampling Experiment.
Twenty-four hour deployments are planned for ten
ISS locations, including the areas where particles were
previously sampled, and will give information on
typical diurnal cycles of particle concentrations in the
cabin. It is expected that the particle concentrations
during crew working hours will be significantly higher
than during crew sleep. The difference between these
particle levels will quantify the particle emissions from
operational equipment in the module.

Fig. 12. The Airborne Particulate Monitor (APM)
which measures particles from 5 nm to 20 micrometres
and is scheduled for a technology demonstration
experiment on ISS in 2020
Multiple deployments in the same location will
provide better statistics and provide opportunities to
measure during different activities. For example, when
visiting vehicles arrive to ISS, hatch opening is a very
interesting time to measure particles.
A good
comparison would be to have one ‘general’ deployment
in Node 2, and then have one deployment near the
mobile orange duct (that vents and mixes the air from
the docked vehicle). This air is notoriously dirty in
terms of gases, but has never been documented in terms
of particle concentrations. It will be possible look at the
daily payload experiment and exercise schedule to
cross-reference the particle measurements with potential
emission sources. Another scenario of interest is to look
at data from co-located gas sensor payloads or systems
for a complete characterization of air quality (both gases
and particles).

4.3 Miniaturized Instruments for Spacecraft Cabin
Monitoring
The Earth and Space Air Prize (ESAP) was a crowdsourcing challenge launched in November 2017, to
foster technology development of miniaturized aerosol
sensors according to spaceflight hardware design
guidelines. Three finalists were chosen out of 20
submitted proposals. The final prototype demonstration
was held at the NASA Glenn Research Center in
November 2019 where the three finalists technologies
competed for the $100k grand prize.
The small business Applied Particle Technology
(APT, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) won the grand prize
with their multi-wavelength spectrometer which gives
particle mass concentrations in terms of PM2.5 (the
particle mass concentration for all particles 2.5
micrometres and smaller) and PM10 (particle mass
concentration for all particles 10 micrometres and

Page 7 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

smaller). The instrument output includes a particle size
distribution between 0.35 and 20 micrometres, in
addition to identifying the particle material as either
light absorbing or light scattering.
Figures 13 and 14 show data from APT sensor,
taken from one test run of the final prototype
demonstration event of the Earth and Space Air Prize
challenge. Lunar simulant JSC-1A was aerosolized in a
chamber and the sensor measured PM10 and PM2.5
particle mass concentrations (Fig. 13), as well as
measuring a size distribution of the simulant (Fig. 14
shows a representative size distribution chosen at a
discrete time during the test).

Fig. 13. Applied Particle Technology ESAP sensor
measured PM2.5 and PM10 mass concentrations of
lunar simulant

Fig. 14. Applied Particle Technology ESAP sensor
measured the particle size distribution of lunar simulant
from 0.35 to 20 micrometres
A contract is in work to fund improvements on the
aerosol sensor for a future flight experiment,
particularly with a goal of making a hand-held device
that is compatible with the Astrobee payload interfaces
[14]. The APT instrument development plan includes
miniaturizing the design of the optical sensing
component, sensor inlet improvement to minimize
particle losses, circuit board re-design with attention to
EMI best practices, and packaging in a new smaller case

which is compatible with the Astrobee payload
envelope. A test chamber will be built for calibration
with generated test aerosols including metal aerosols
(stainless steel), metal oxide aerosols (such as TiO2),
reference aerosols (Arizona road dust), Lunar simulant,
and combustion aerosols (Smoke, black carbon and
pyrolyzed plastics) covering size ranges from 300nm up
to 10 microns. These test aerosols match aerosols which
are expected to be encountered in a space application,
with insight from the Aerosol Sampling Experiment
results. Smart calibration factors will enable the
machine learning algorithms to distinguish the material
of the particles, including the discrimination between
smoke and dust. This is a highly sought capability, as
the current practice on ISS is to disable the smoke
detectors during vacuuming, in order to prevent false
fire alarms from cabin dust. The goal is for future
particulate monitors to have ‘smart’ capabilities for
vehicle autonomy and less operational complexity.
The runner-up team from Colorado State University
(Fort Collins, Colorado, USA) designed the Mobile
Aerosol Reference Sensor (MARS), which measures
total particulate mass below 2.5 micrometres (PM2.5),
as well as ambient temperature, pressure and relative
humidity [15]. The follow-on work is contracted with
team members working at Access Sensor Technologies
(AST), a university-related company. Both ESAP
instruments rely on light scattering measurements which
must be correlated to actual particle concentrations
through material-specific calibrations.
Without
calibration factors, the output may not reflect actual
particle concentrations. It is advantageous to pursue
flight experiments with both instruments, since the APT
instrument has more sensitivity and capability, while the
CSU/AST instrument has an internal filter which can be
returned to Earth for gravimetric analysis, thus
providing a calibration factor for typical ISS aerosols.
Having this calibration would increase the accuracy of
aerosol mass concentration measurements of both
instruments, and both would be candidates for future
space exploration vehicles and habitats.
The AST MARS instrument development includes
updating the instrument enclosure for reduced weight
and to accommodate a higher air sample flow rate of 2
litres per min through the sensor and filter train. The
flow path will be widened to minimize losses of 10 um
particles in the optical bench. Additional size-selective
inlets will be designed and tested for sampling of PM10
(particulate matter 10 micrometres and below) and PMrespirable (particulate matter 4 micrometres and below)
at 2 litres per minute airflow. A display panel will be
added to the instrument to replace the cell phone
interface and app, which is not compatible with ISS
operation.

Page 8 of 9

70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Washington D.C., United States, 21-25 October 2019.
This article is a U.S. government work, and is not subject to copyright in the United States.

5. Conclusions
Prior to 2014, the airborne particulate matter in the
International Space Station cabin was not addressed as
part of the Life Support Systems Project. The rationale
was that gaseous pollutants were a much greater threat
to crew health, however, funds were prioritized for dust
mitigation efforts. Since that time, a subset of ISS cabin
aerosols have been collected, returned to Earth and
characterized with multiple analysis techniques. The
resulting data set of particle morphology, elemental
composition, size and abundance of particles has led to
knowledge of common particle types and many
emission sources. While the sampling results are only a
snapshot of the aerosols in two increments (end of 2016
and summer 2018), the real-time aerosol instrument
development activities will provide a much larger data
set, and allow the mapping of particle concentrations in
various ISS locations. Technology demonstrations of
the reference-quality Airborne Particulate Monitor and
the miniaturized instruments from the Earth and Space
Air Prize competition will increase the technology
readiness levels of these sensors and are expected to
make particulate monitoring on ISS operational in the
near future.
Acknowledgements
Funding for these projects is provided by the NASA
Advanced Exploration Systems Life Support Systems
Project. Aerosol Sampler analyses were performed by
RJ Lee group (Traci Lersch, Kristin Bunker, and Gary
Casuccio).
References
[1] J.L. Perry, Elements of Spacecraft Cabin Air Quality
Control Design, NASA Technical Publication TP1998-207978, 1998.
[2] M. E. Meyer, ISS Ambient Air Quality: Updated
Inventory of Known Aerosol Sources, ICES-2014199,
44th
International
Conference
on
Environmental Systems, AIAA, Tucson, Arizona,
2014, 13 – 17 July.
[3] J. L. Perry, Analysis of Particulate and Fiber Debris
Samples Returned from the International Space
Station, NASA Engineering Analysis Report, Rev.
A. NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Alabama,
January 2013.
[4] B. Boyajian, M. E. Meyer, Characterization and
Analysis of Aerosol Particle Retention and Reaerosolization from Hook and Loop Fasteners on the
International Space Station, NASA Technical
Memorandum TM-2018-219925.
[5] M. E. Meyer, Aerosol Sampling Experiment on the
International Space Station, ICES-2017-74, 47th

International Conference on Environmental Systems,
AIAA, Charleston, South Carolina, 2017, 16 – 20
July.
[6] M. E. Meyer, Results of the Aerosol Sampling
Experiment on the International Space Station,
ICES-2018-100, 48th International Conference on
Environmental Systems, AIAA, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, 2018, 8 – 12 July.
[7] M. E. Meyer, Further Characterization of Aerosols
Sampled on the International Space Station, ICES2018-100, 49th International Conference on
Environmental
Systems,
AIAA,
Boston,
Massachusetts, 2019, 7 – 11 July.
[8] C. Turner, J. Goodman, S. Mohler, R. Mungin, M.
Weislogel, E. K. Ungar, J. C. Buchli, Mitigation of
Micro-Droplet Ejections During Open Cabin Unit
Operations Aboard ISS, ICES-2018-201, 49th
International Conference on Environmental Systems,
AIAA, Boston, Massachusetts, 2019, 7 – 11 July.
[9] J. Goodman, L. Villarreal, Space Shuttle Crew
Compartment Debris/Contamination, SAE Technical
Paper 921345, 1992.
[10] S. V. Hering, G. S. Lewis, S. R. Spielman, and A.
Eiguren-Fernandez, A MAGIC concept for selfsustained, water-based, ultrafine particle counting,
Aerosol Science and Technology 53, no. 1 (2019):
63-72.
[11] S. V. Hering, S. R. Spielman, G. S. Lewis,
Moderated, water-based, condensational particle
growth in a laminar flow, Aerosol Science and
Technology 48, no. 4 (2014): 401-408.
[12] R.S. Gao, H. Telg, R. J. McLaughlin, S. J. Ciciora,
L. A. Watts, M. S. Richardson, J. P. Schwarz et al.,
A light-weight, high-sensitivity particle spectrometer
for PM2.5 aerosol measurements, Aerosol Science
and Technology 50, no. 1 (2016): 88-99.
[13] P. Yu, K. H. Rosenlof, S. Liu, H. Telg, T. D.
Thornberry, A. W. Rollins, R. W. Portmann et al.,
Efficient transport of tropospheric aerosol into the
stratosphere via the Asian summer monsoon
anticyclone, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 114, no. 27 (2017): 6972-6977.
[14] M. G. Bualat, T. Smith, E.E. Smith, T. Fong, D. W.
Wheeler, Astrobee: A New Tool for ISS Operations,
2018 SpaceOps Conference (p. 2517).
[15] J. Tryner, C. Quinn, B.C. Windom, J. Volckens,
Design and evaluation of a portable PM 2.5 monitor
featuring a low-cost sensor in line with an active
filter sampler, Environmental Science: Processes &
Impacts 21 no. 8 (2019): 1403-1415.

Page 9 of 9

