Three stage cool flame droplet burning behavior of
n-alkane droplets at elevated pressure conditions: Hot,
warm and cool flame
T.I. Farouk a, ∗, D. Dietrich b, F.L. Dryer a, c
a Department

of Mechanical Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA
b NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH 44135, USA
c Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

Abstract
Transient, isolated n-alkane droplet combustion is simulated at elevated pressure for helium-diluent
substituted-air mixtures. We report the presence of unique quasi-steady, three-stage burning behavior of
large sphero-symmetric n-alkane droplets at these elevated pressures and helium substituted ambient fractions. Upon initiation of reaction, hot-flame diffusive burning of large droplets is initiated that radiatively
extinguishes to establish cool flame burning conditions in nitrogen/oxygen “air” at atmospheric and elevated
pressures. However, at elevated pressure and moderate helium substitution for nitrogen (XHe > 20%), the
initiated cool flame burning proceeds through two distinct, quasi-steady-state, cool flame burning conditions. The classical “Hot flame” (∼1500 K) radiatively extinguishes into a “Warm flame” burning mode at
a moderate maximum reaction zone temperature (∼ 970 K), followed by a transition to a lower temperature (∼765 K), quasi-steady “Cool flame” burning condition. The reaction zone (“flame”) temperatures are
associated with distinctly different yields in intermediate reaction products within the reaction zones and
surrounding near-field, and the flame-standoff ratios characterizing each burning mode progressively decrease. The presence of all three stages first appears with helium substitution near 20%, and the duration of
each stage is observed to be strongly dependent on helium substitutions level between 20–60%. For helium
substitution greater than 60%, the hot flame extinction is followed by only the lower temperature cool flame
burning mode. In addition to the strong coupling between the diffusive loss of both energy and species and the
slowly evolving degenerate branching in the low and negative temperature coefficient (NTC) kinetic regimes,
the competition between the low-temperature chain branching and intermediate-temperature chain termination reactions control the “Warm” and “Cool” flame quasi-steady conditions and transitioning dynamics.

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tfarouk@sc.edu (T.I. Farouk).

2

1. Introduction
The chemical characteristics of hightemperature flames for both premixed and nonpremixed systems have been thoroughly investigated by theoretical, experimental and computation methods [1,2]. The comparative characteristic
time-scales for convective, diffusive, radiative, and
chemical heat generation dictate the existence
and burning intensity of these flames and their
ignition, quasi-steady burning, and extinction
dynamics.
Most liquid fuels of practical interest exhibit
a wide range of chemical kinetic time scale generally classified into low, intermediate, and hightemperature behaviors. The low and intermediatetemperature behaviors exhibit characteristics related to peroxy and peroxide chemistry of large
hydrocarbon radicals that result in degenerate
branching and negative temperature coefficient
(NTC) behaviors. Hydrogen peroxide formed as an
intermediate begins to rapidly decompose as reaction temperature increases and combined with significant β scission of the larger radicals leads to
auto-thermal acceleration of chemical rates and,
eventually to high-temperature kinetic behavior
dominated by small radical chain branching chemistry. These chemistries are manifest in cool and
hot flame dynamic behaviors. “Cool flame” phenomena have been observed for homogenous vapor
phase conditions in static reactor [3], flow tube, and
opposed flow configurations [4], and for isolated
droplet configuration associated with auto-ignition
research in drop-towers [5].
Recently, there has been new interest generated
from microgravity isolated droplet combustion experiments on the International Space Station (ISS)
[6,7] and opposed flow diffusion flames in ground
experiments [8]. In the ISS experiments, a sustained
cool flame burning mode was established for a
wide range of fuels when the ignition of sufficiently
large initial drop diameters led to hot flame radiative extinction to yield long duration, “Cool flame”
droplet burning. On limited occasions, sustained
“Cool flame” burns were also initiated by controlling the rate and duration of initiation energy deposition [9].
In recent ground-based, opposed flow, prevaporized, laminar diffusion flame configurations,
ozone was added into the oxidizer stream [10].
The rapid decomposition of ozone produced

active atomic oxygen, substantially reducing the
induction timescale for initiating low-temperature,
exothermic fuel oxidation chemistry. The reduced
time-scales led to flame initiation and quasi-stable
“Cool flame” diffusive burning at intermediate
reaction temperatures characteristic of the NTC
kinetic regime. Recent experiments [11] and numerical simulations [12] have shown that in the
opposed flow configuration for dimethyl ether,
there can exist a multistage premixed flame at nearlimit conditions. The occurrence of this multistage
flame structure is attributed to the result of two
different sets of chain-branching reactions involving small radical chemistry and peroxy chemistry
at intermediate and low temperatures respectively.
In our prior work [13] we reported the existence of
a highly transient multistage oscillatory cool flame
behavior where the droplet combustion continuously evolves between a hot and cool flame - not
having a co-occurrence of the two different flames;
never attaining a quasi-steady burn. However,
neither experimental or computational endeavors
have revealed whether stable multistage flame
behaviors could exist for multiphase (e.g., isolated
microgravity droplet) configurations.
Below, we report results from numerical simulations of n-heptane droplet combustion at an
elevated pressure where the ambient nitrogen is
progressively replaced with helium to augment
diffusive losses. Modeling results show that at
moderate helium substitution, the initiated burn
proceeds through three distinct stages. For large
initial droplet sizes, the classical hot flame radiatively extinguishes into a “Warm flame” burning at
moderate/intermediate reaction zone temperature
condition, followed by a transition to a lower temperature quasi-steady “Cool flame” burning condition. The simulations further demarcate the conditions under which quasi-steady, three-stage burning
behaviors exist, and the dynamic transitions that
progress to yield these different burning behaviors.
The apriori numerical predictions and interpretations described below were used to guide an ISS
isolated droplet combustion experimental test matrix that considered elevated pressure and high helium diluent substitution using n-dodecane as fuel.
Results from the experiments confirm and compare well against the predicted three-stage behavior
in terms of droplet diameter, flame stand-off ratio
(FSR =d f lame /ddroplet ), and radiant emission evolution histories.

3

2. Experimental setup and procedure
Experiments were performed in the Multi-User
Droplet Combustion Apparatus (MDCA) insert
in the ISS Combustion Integrated Rack (CIR),
a full-sized rack facility in the ISS-Destiny module. The hardware and software are nearly identical to that detailed in a previous publication [14].
In the present experiments, the field-of-view (FOV)
of the backlit images of the droplet increased to
5 cm × 5 cm, resulting in slightly less spatial resolution but increased ability to record longer duration burning histories within the FOV. A new intensified camera (1392 × 1040 pixel array) equipped
with a rotating filter wheel and an increased FOV
(90 mm × 68 mm) recorded the radiative emissions
associated with “Hot” and “Cool flame” conditions.
The rotating filter wheel contained a 430 nm filter to visualize the CH∗ chemiluminescence during “Hot flame” burning, and a wideband filter
to detect formaldehyde chemiluminescence (390–
490 nm) during “Cool flame” burning. A separate,
wide angle radiometer was used to record radiant
emission history. The radiometer signal was used
to determine the initiation of “Hot flame”, automatically power off and retract the igniter from the
vicinity of the droplet. When the radiometer signal
showed “Hot flame” extinction, the intensified camera intensifier gain increases and the “Cool flame”
filter rotated into position to record the formaldehyde chemiluminescence during cool flame burning. The observed “Cool flame” emission could
not be observed on the color video camera on the
MDCA and was of poor quality even on the intensified camera. The “Cool flame” images were improved using median filtering and image-averaging
over 500 ms [15], and an automated image processing procedure was then applied to determine flame
diameter from line profile across the center of the
flame image. Here we report two relevant measures
of the flame, the peak-to-peak flame diameter representing the diameter of peak chemiluminescence
and an FWHM diameter that represents the outer
diameter of the flame where the grayscale value of
the flame chemiluminescence decreased to one-half
the peak value.
3. Numerical modeling
The mathematical model employed to describe the transient vaporization, ignition, and
combustion histories of isolated pure and multicomponent fuel droplets both in the high and lowtemperature regime under microgravity conditions
was presented and validated in earlier publications
[7,9,13]. The model assumes sphero-symmetry because of microgravity conditions. The conservation
equations for mass, species, and energy are solved
for the liquid and gas phases. Both Fickian and
Soret diffusion is taken into account for evaluating

multicomponent species diffusion velocities. The
radiative effects are predicted via a spectrally
resolved statistical narrow band (SNB) radiation
model [16]. Liquid phase property data are taken
from the Daubert and Danner database [17].
Comprehensive kinetic mechanisms consisting
of 652 species, 2827 reactions [18] and 583 species
and 2609 reactions [19] were employed to describe
the gas phase chemical reactions of n-heptane
and n-dodecane respectively. Both the mechanisms
are detailed constructs capable of resolving the
high and low-temperature kinetic regimes. The ndodecane model is a reduced construct developed
for n-alkanes covering a carbon number range from
C7 –C20 . Sooting phenomena are not accounted for
in the numerical simulations, and only present during the hot flame initiation phase, experimentally.
Symmetry conditions are imposed at the center
of the droplet. At the liquid/gas interface, the
continuity of fluxes of energy and species is considered. The far field boundary (∼200 times the
initial droplet diameter) is defined using a Dirichlet boundary condition by prescribing ambient
composition and temperature (i.e., XO2 / XN2 / XHe
and 298 K).
4. Results and discussion
First, we discuss the simulation results for an nheptane droplet of do = 4.00 mm burning at 3 atm
pressure. The ambient composition consists of
XO2 = 21% and balance of nitrogen that is progressively substituted with helium. Three representative helium substitution cases (i.e., XHe = 20, 40
and 60%) are presented. These cases are chosen to
be within substitution range where inception and
cessation of three-stage burning behavior are observed. For complete substitution (XHe = 79%), the
presence of a three-stage burning behavior is not
predicted. Figure 1 shows the predicted droplet diameter, FSR, burning rate (Kb ) and peak gas temperature (Tmax ) evolution histories. For all three
cases, the FSR initially grows, representative of an
increasing “Hot flame” diameter. The flame steadily
grows in diameter with a decrease in the flame temperature to the maximum diameter (i.e., maximum
FSR) and then undergoes radiative extinction. In
all the three cases, following the first-stage “Hot
flame”, the system transitions to a second-stage, but
unlike previous observations [7,9] this second-stage
is associated with an intermediate-temperature
“Warm flame” burn occurring at ∼970 K (Fig. 1b).
The system undergoes a second transition to a
third-stage burn characterized by a lower temperature (∼765 K) “Cool Flame” burn. It is apparent
from the FSR evolution history that each of the
burning transitions is associated with a contraction of the flame (reduction in the FSR). Despite,
the large variation in the flame structure, there are
no distinctive changes to be noted in the predicted

4

Fig. 1. Evolution of (a) droplet diameter, FSR and (b)
predicted Kb , Tmax for n-heptane droplet combustion
(do = 4.00 mm, P = 3 atm, XO2 = 21%, denoted XHe and
balance XN2 ). The three-stage burning behavior is demarcated with the vertical dashed lines only for the
XHe = 40% case.

droplet diameter regression history. The droplet regression rate is related to the heat feedback from
the flame to the droplet, which is a function of
the temperature gradient toward the drop surface.
Even though the flame temperature decreases, the
distance between the flame and the droplet also
decreases such that the gradient does not change
significantly. Thus, the regression rate is relatively
insensitive to the different burning regimes. In general, once the droplet is driven to near-saturation
temperature, the gross feature of diameter regression rate does not vary substantially.
The helium substitution in the ambient strongly
dictates the three-stage burning characteristics. For
XHe = 20%, the intermediate-temperature secondstage burn continues for ∼23 s and is followed by
a very brief ∼0.5 s low-temperature third-stage. As
the XHe fraction is increased, the duration of the
second-stage is decreased and the third-stage increases. As the XHe approaches 60%, the secondstage is suppressed to ∼1 s, followed by a thirdstage “Cool flame” burn for ∼18 s. The shorter and
longer burn durations are also evidenced in the Kb
evolution (Fig. 1b). The higher helium substitution
augments the diffusive losses which dictate the second and third-stage burn. The first-stage remains

Fig. 2. Evolution of (a) radiative and (b) diffusive heat
losses for n-heptane droplet combustion (do = 4.00 mm,
P = 3 atm, XO2 = 21%, denoted XHe and balance XN2 ).
The three-stage burning behavior is demarcated with the
vertical dashed lines only for the XHe = 40% case.

relatively insensitive to helium substitution with the
transition to the second-stage at ∼3 s. However, helium substitution increases Kb and hence results in
shorter total burn times (Fig. 1b). The higher thermal diffusivity of helium leads to improved heat
transfer to the droplet surface which contributes to
the increasing Kb .
Figure 2 presents the predicted temporal evolution of the integrated net radiant and diffusive heat
losses for the 3 atm cases. The net radiative and diffusive heat loss evolution is obtained by integrating
the predicted radiative fluxes at all wavelength and
the diffusive heat fluxes from the flame location to
the far-field. For all the cases, the radiative heat loss
dominates the first-stage burn and the transition to
the second-stage takes place when the radiant heat
reaches ∼35 W. The growth of the flame radius in
the first-stage is such that for all the cases the radiant heat attains its maximum at ∼3 s. As the system
transitions to the second-stage “Warm flame” burn
the radiative heat loss decreases but still remains
significant and only diminishes as the burn evolves
to the third-stage. This is in contrast to atmospheric

5

Fig. 3. Evolution of (a) droplet diameter, FSR and (b)
predicted Kb , Tmax for n-heptane droplet combustion
(do = 4.00 mm, P = 5 atm, XO2 = 21%, denoted XHe and
balance XN2 ). The three-stage burning behavior is demarcated with the vertical dashed lines only for the
XHe = 60% case.

pressure, n-heptane/air “Cool flame” droplet burning where radiative losses were considerably less
than diffusive losses. In comparison, the diffusive
heat loss is lower in the first-stage but is comparable
to the radiative loss in the second-stage. It is only in
the low-temperature “Cool flame” burn that the diffusive heat loss to the far-field surpasses the radiative contribution. The heat loss temporal profile indicates that the three-stage transition is dictated by
the size of the flame and the associated relative balance between radiative, diffusive heat transfer and
the heat generation as the droplet size regresses. It is
apparent that with an increase in helium concentration the diffusive heat loss increases which is due to
the higher thermal diffusivity of helium. The sharp
rise in the early transient of the diffusive heat loss is
a result of the prescribed thermal ignition profile.
Figure 3 presents the predicted droplet diameter,
FSR, Kb and Tmax evolution for three representative three-stage burning behavior at 5 atm. The
choice of the two operating pressure conditions
(i.e., 3 and 5 atm) is a result of the operational capability of the MDCA onboard the ISS. Similar to
the 3 atm cases, at 5 atm pressure, a distinct threestage burning behavior is observed unlike the 1 atm

Fig. 4. Chemical pathways for n-heptane droplets undergoing three-stage burning and ignition delay time of nheptane as a function of temperature at three different
pressure is also shown. The vertical arrows in the ignition delay plot denote the activation energy in the NTC
regime.

helium diluent exchange studies [7]. In comparison
to the 3 atm predictions, higher helium loading
is required to initiate the three-stage behavior at
5 atm. At 5 atm, an onset of the three-stage occurs
for XHe = 40% which is a factor of two higher than
the inception condition of the 3 atm case. At the
same time, at XHe = 79% an equally spaced out
three-stage behavior is observed whereas at 3 atm
XHe = 60% results in a near suppression of the
“Warm flame” burn. Kinetically, an increase in the
operating pressure results in an increase in both
the turnover temperature into the NTC regime
and hot ignition temperature transition associated
with hydrogen peroxide decomposition (Fig. 4).
However, the difference in the ignition delay time
(reactivity) between the two temperatures decreases

6

with increasing pressure, resulting in a reduced
range of conditions over which heat release (kinetic
time scales) and heat loss (diffusive time scales) can
balance to yield quasi-steady second-stage burning.
Figure 4 shows the dominant chemistry in the
high, intermediate and low-temperature kinetic
regimes. At high temperatures the consumption of
n-heptane proceeds entirely by decomposition and
H-abstraction reactions followed by β scission reactions to form lower carbon number alkyl and
alkenyl fragments that eventually decompose and
react further to produce small radicals (CH3 , HO2 ,
OH, H, HCO). At temperatures below which heptyl radical beta scission dominates, peroxy radicals R7 OO• form via O2 addition, followed by isomerization to • Q7 OOH and a second oxygen addition and adduct isomerization results in forming
ketohydroperoxides OQ7 OOH and OH, yielding
degenerate chain branching. The relative rates of
R7 OO• and • O2 Q7 OOH formation/decomposition
as well as the decompositions of their isomerized configurations control the rate of degenerate
branching which manifests in the turnover temperature and NTC behaviors. The decomposition
of hydroperoxyalkyl • Q7 OOH forms small alkenes,
aldehydes, heptene and HO2 , C7 -cyclic ethers and
OH, C7 -etherocycle species reducing degenerate
branching in the NTC – intermediate-temperature
regime. Our earlier investigations of cool flame
droplet burning of n-heptane in air at atmospheric
pressure showed that decomposition of and reversal of oxygen addition to • Q7 OOH led to extinction
as heat losses forced maximum reaction temperatures in the NTC regime toward the turnover temperature [7].
In some recent works [20,21] it has been
proposed that peroxy-alkyl hydroperoxide species
(O2 QOOH; Q =Cn H2n ) can undergo an alternative
isomerization to produce alkyl-dihydroperoxides
(P(OOH )2 ; P =Cn H2n−1 ), which is followed by a
third O2 addition to form O2 P(OOH)2 radicals.
The P(OOH)2 species can also undergo β-scission
forming olefins or decompose to form hydroperoxyl cyclic ethers. These additional pathways have
been demonstrated to have a significant influence
on n-hexane and iso-octane ignition delay times at
high pressure only. It is likely that developments in
the intermediate-temperature kinetics of n-heptane
and higher alkanes will emerge and may modify
the details of the reaction paths depicted in Fig. 4,
though the global kinetic behaviors must continue
to reflect the experimental observations present in
the literature.
Figures 5 and 6 shows the flame structure behaviors over the entire droplet burning phenomena
via spatiotemporal contour plots of the stable combustion products, major intermediates and selected
key species, where the FSR is also inlaid to readily
identify the flame location. The vertical dash lines
sharply delineate the distinct three-stage combustion behavior.

In the first-stage “Hot flame” (∼1500 K) combustion, diffusive burning results in H2 O and
CO2 as the major products (Fig. 5b and c).
CO and much lower concentrations of hydrocarbon appear as intermediate species. As the system transitions to “Warm flame” burning conditions (∼970 K), H2 O remains as a major product species, but the conversion of CO to CO2 in
the flame structure is substantially inhibited. The
“Warm flame” NTC kinetic reactions and competition of hydrocarbon and oxygenated hydrocarbon
fragments for OH, strongly suppressing the oxidation ofCO through CO + OH → CO2 + H, leaving only the much slower formation path of conversion, CO + HO2 → CO2 + OH. Intermediate
concentrations of smaller alkenes, alkynes (C2 H4 ,
C2 H2 , C3 H6 , C4 H8 not shown here) also become
more prominent for similar reasons. A significant
increase in HO2 concentration in the flame zone
highlights reactions associated with R7 OO• and
Q7 OOH that limits degenerate branching is controlling chemical time scales. At increased pressure, and sufficient helium substitution the radiative loss during the second-stage burn exceeds diffusive losses to the far-field (Fig. 2). The presence
of helium also augments the diffusive transport of
species in the flame zone sufficiently to slow NTC
reactions that define the heat generation time scale.
The increased diffusive loss associated with both
heat loss to the far field and reduced heat generation from species transport control the near quasisteady second-stage “Warm flame” behavior, with
flame temperatures residing between the hot ignition and turnover temperature. As the reaction
temperature approaches the turnover temperature,
the behavior transitions to the third-stage condition. The increased heat release rates at temperatures below the turnover (due to increased pressure)
are sufficient to balance the enhanced diffusive
transport resulting in the near quasi-steady thirdstage behavior at lower temperatures. At atmospheric pressure conditions, even without helium
substitution, heat generation rates at these temperatures cannot sustain continued “Cool flame”
droplet burning in a transition from burning in the
NTC kinetic regime across the turnover temperature condition.
The spatiotemporal contour plots of exemplary key low-temperature combustion species are
presented in Fig. 6. In addition to formaldehyde CH2 O, acetaldehyde CH3 CHO, cyclic
ether C7 H14 O, hydroperoxyalkyl C7 H14 OOH,
peroxyalkylhydroperoxide O2 C7 H14 OOH and
ketohydroperoxide C7 H14 O3 species are found
to be present at high concentrations during the
third-stage “Cool flame” burn. C7 H14 O is also
significant in the “Warm flame” burn and overlaps
with n-heptene (not shown here).
Data for an elevated pressure, helium substituted droplet experiment with n-dodecane as fuel
(FLame EXtinguishment experiment 1268) are

7

Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal contour of (a) gas phase temperature and mass fraction of (b) H2 O, (c) CO2 , (d) CO, (e) H2 O2
and (f) HO2 for n-heptane undergoing three-stage combustion (do = 4.00 mm, 3 atm, XO2 = 21%, XHe = 40% and balance
N2 ).

Fig. 6. Spatiotemporal contour of (a) total C7 H14 OOH, (b) total O2 C7 H14 OOH, (c) total C7 H14 O3 , (d) total C7 H14 O, (e)
CH3CHO and (f) CH2 O for n-heptane undergoing three-stage combustion (do = 4.00 mm, 3 atm, XO2 = 21%, XHe = 40%
and balance N2 ).

compared with simulations in Fig. 7. Similar to
the n-heptane results discussed above, a three-stage
burning behavior is observed. While the predicted
droplet diameter regression and the transition time
to the second-stage agree very well with measurements, the predicted FSR and radiant emission
results considerably differ from the measurements.
Sooting observed in the experimental hot ignition
and flame transition phase are likely responsible
for the disparities during the first-stage “Hot

flame” burn. Furthermore, the predictions show
a longer second-stage burn that transitions to a
short third-stage “Cool flame”. Experimentally
the duration of the second-stage “Warm flame”
is a factor of ∼2 shorter than predictions, and a
re-initiation and radiant extinction of hot flame
burning is also observed. A sensitivity analysis
of the low and intermediate temperature pathways of the parent fuel identified the ·• Q12 OOH →
OH+· Q12 O (cyclic ethers ) reaction classes to be the

8

Fig. 7. Measured and predicted evolution of droplet
diameter, flame diameter and radiant heat for an ndodecane droplet combustion (do = 4.35 mm, 2.75 atm,
XO2 = 21%, XHe = 29% and balance N2 , FLEX 1268).
The duration of the first, second and third-stage burn of
the experiment and model is demarcated at the top and
bottom of the figure.

most sensitive in the “Warm flame” burn and the
·•
O2 Q12 OOH → OH+Q12 OOH, ·• O2 Q12 OOH →
OH + OQ12 OOH(ketohydroperoxides)
having
highest sensitivity in the “Cool flame” burn mode.
Closer consideration of the kinetic model for ndodecane oxidation show that the low-temperature
and NTC regime properties are identical to those
for n-heptane, likely because these kinetics for the
n-dodecane model are based upon similarity to
and data for the n-heptane low and NTC kinetics.
However, the overall rates of isomerization for
radical-O2 adducts yield degenerate branching
should be faster for n-dodecane than for n-decane,
based upon the statistical number of five and six
membered ring formations possible with increased
n-alkane carbon number [22]. It is likely that
the above disparities of second and third-stage
behaviors for n-dodecane experiment and predictions may result from uncertainties in low and
intermediate-temperature n-dodecane kinetics. As
for the reignition, our prior study [13] identified
that the heat feedback through the tether fiber can
play a substantial role in this behavior. However
other external sources of perturbation can also
trigger this phenomenon. In general, in these
systems the dynamic processes (e.g., re-ignition,
transition in burning stage) are caused by diffusive/kinetically controlled heat release balances
and when balances can no longer be achieved,
either re-ignition or extinction occurs.

5. Summary
Experimental and simulation data for largediameter n-alkane droplet combustion at elevated
pressure and helium diluent substitution are reported. A unique three-stage burning behavior is

observed. Initiation of “Hot flame” burning transitions through radiation extinction to nearly quasisteady “Warm” and then “Cool flame” burning conditions. The simulations elucidate the strong dependence of observations on helium diluent substitution and ambient pressure that promote different
burning conditions where net heat generation rate
from low or NTC kinetic behaviors and net total
heat loss rate from radiation and diffusive transport are nearly balanced. The second-stage “Warm
flame” condition results from a balance of heat release at kinetic conditions within the NTC kinetic
regime against heat loss, which is dominated by radiant loss. The third-stage condition results from
an inability to achieve higher heat release rates to
balance net heat loss rates as flame temperatures
decrease toward the turnover temperature condition. The “Warm flame” condition can no longer be
stabilized and dynamically transitions to a nearly
quasi-steady balance of heat generation and loss at
flame temperatures lower than the turnover temperature and within the low-temperature kinetic
regime. In this third-stage “Cool flame” condition,
diffusive losses are found to be greater than radiative contributions to the total heat loss rate.
The time and spatial histories of species for nheptane droplet combustion indicative of incomplete hydrocarbon consumption (reduced oxidation of CO to CO2 ) and the shift in intermediate
oxygenated alkyl fragments demarcate the kinetic
characteristics for all three burning modes and support that the “Warm” and “Cool flame” burning
modes lie in the NTC, and low-temperature kinetic
regimes, respectively.
Similar experiments using n-dodecane as fuel indicate that re-initiation of hot flame burning from
the “Warm flame” condition can occur when the
heat release/loss balance results in reaction temperatures exceeding the NTC “hot ignition” condition. No such phenomena are predicted using current n-dodecane oxidation kinetics for which low
and NTC parameters are based upon those of nheptane. The quantitative differences in cool flame
behaviors are likely due to current deficiencies in
the n-dodecane kinetic sub-model components.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
through grant numbers NNX14AG461A (TF) and
NNX09AW 19A (FLD).
References
[1] F.A. Williams, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 26 (2000)
657–682.
[2] W.A. Sirignano, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 42
(2014) 54–86.

9
[3] R. Fairlie, J.F. Griffiths, K.J. Hughes, H. Pearlman,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 30 (2005) 1057–1064.
[4] R. Foresti, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 5 (1955) 582–589.
[5] M. Tanabe, M. Kono, J. Sato, J. Koenig, C. Eigenbrod, H. Rath, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 25 (1994)
455–461.
[6] V. Nayagam, D.L. Dietrich, P.V. Ferkul, M.C. Hicks,
F.A. Williams, Combust. Flame 159 (2012)
3583–3588.
[7] T.I. Farouk, F.L. Dryer, Combust. Flame 161 (2014)
565–581.
[8] S.H. Won, B. Jiang, P. Diévart, C.H. Sohn, Y. Ju,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 881–888.
[9] T.I. Farouk, D. Dietrich, F.E. Alam, F.L. Dryer,
Proc. Combust. Inst. 36 (2017) 2523–2530.
[10] C.B. Reuter, S.H. Won, Y. Ju, Combust. Flame 166
(2016) 125–132.
[11] C.B. Reuter, S.H. Won, Y. Ju, Proc. Combust. Inst. 36
(2017) 1513–1522.
[12] Y. Ju, C.B. Reuter, S.H. Won, Combust. Flame 162
(2015) 3580–3588.
[13] T.I. Farouk, M.C. Hicks, F.L. Dryer, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 35 (2015) 1701–1708.
[14] D.L. Dietrich, V. Nayagam, M.C. Hicks, P.V. Ferkul, F.L. Dryer, T. Farouk, B.D. Shaw, H.K. Suh,
M.Y. Choi, Y.C. Liu, C.T. Avedisian, F.A. Williams,
Microgravity Sci. Technol. 26 (2014) 65–76.

[15] V. Nayagam, D.L. Dietrich, F.A. Williams, AIAA J.
54 (2016) 1235–1239.
[16] Z. Chen, X. Qin, B. Xu, Y. Ju, F. Liu, Proc. Combust.
Inst. 31 (2007) 2693–2700.
[17] T.E. Daubert, R.P. Danner, Physical and Thermodynamic Properties of Pure Chemicals: Data Compilation, Hemisphere Publishing, New York, 1989.
[18] M. Mehl, W. Pitz, C. Westbrook, H. Curran, Proc.
Combust. Inst. 33 (2011) 193–200.
[19] S. Sarathy, C. Westbrook, M. Mehl, W. Pitz,
C. Togbe, P. Dagaut, H. Wang, M. Oehlschlaeger,
U. Niemann, K. Seshadri, P. Veloo, C. Ji, F. Egolfopoulos, T. Lu, Combust. Flame 158 (2011)
2338–2357.
[20] N. Atef, G. Kukkadapu, S.Y. Mohamed,
M.A. Rashidi, C. Banyon, M. Mehl, K.A. Heufer,
E.F. Nasir, A. Alfazazi, A.K. Das, C.K. Westbrook,
W.J. Pitz, T. Lu, A. Farooq, C.-J. Sung, H.J. Curran, S.M. Sarathy, Combust. Flame 178 (2017)
111–134.
[21] Z. Wang, S.M. Sarathy, Combust. Flame 165 (2016)
364–372.
[22] F.L. Dryer, Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 117–144.

