















































PowerPoint Presentation


Effects of Ambient Inert Gas Properties on Cool-Flame Combustion 
of Normal-Alkane Droplets in Microgravity

Vedha Nayagam
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH

Daniel L. Dietrich
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH

Forman A. Williams
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA

Annual Meeting of the American Society for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR), 
Virtual Meeting November 5-6, 2020



Background & Motivation
o Quasi-steady cool flames were discovered during normal-alkane fuel droplet 

combustion onboard ISS in the FLEX experiments.

o Cool flames can extend the flammability of fuels in a microgravity 
environment, and understanding their burning characteristics is important 
from spacecraft fire safety point of view.

o Inert gases are used to extinguish fires in microgravity. Currently CO2 is used 
in the US module of ISS. Other inert gases such as Helium, Xenon, etc., can 
also inhibit combustion at sufficient dilution (Limiting oxygen index, LOI). 

o In this study we present experimental results (from FLEX/FLEX-2/CFI) for n-
alkane fuel-droplet cool-flame burning rates and extinction diameters in 
Helium or Xenon diluted ambient conditions.

o Unlike hot-flames, cool flames are controlled by chemical kinetics. We 
employ a simplified, 6-step-chemistry, asymptotic theory developed earlier 
to correlate the burning rate and extinction diameters of n-alkane fuel 
droplets.



• Video images are analyzed to obtain droplet, and flame diameters.
• Narrow and wide-band radiometers measured radiant emissions from the flame.

Cool flame in helium-diluted environment



• Scaled square of the droplet diameter as function of scaled time for n-octane droplets in 
nitrogen, carbon dioxide, helium, and xenon ambient with oxygen mole fraction at 0.17.

Cool flames in different diluents

He

Xe



Theory of Quasi-Steady Cool-Flame Combustion Near Extinction*

* Williams and Nayagam, Combustion Theory and Modelling, 23 (4), 2019

o Quasi-steady theory using activation energy asymptotics and 6-step simplified 
chemical kinetic mechanism

o Cool flame structure

F – fuel
R – alkyl radical
I  – intermediate
K – ketohydroperoxide
P, Q, S – products



Quasi-steady cool-flame theory predictions

o Burning rate constant: Kc = d(D2)/dt

o Cool-flame theory assumed constant properties and a property-evaluation procedure is 
needed to compare against experiments (as with hot-flame QS theories*).

* Law and Williams, Combustion and Flame, 19 (3), 1972

o Property evaluation prescription – empirically based on data fitting



Calculated and measured cool-flame burning rates
(a)

(b)

(c)

(a) 21% O2 – He varies –displaces N2

(b) O2 varies –rest N2

(c) Xe or He displaces air

For case (c) with He, the burning 
becomes highly transient – QS not 
valid



o Cool-flame extinction diameter Dce:

Quasi-steady cool-flame theory predictions

o Critical dissipation rate, or critical inverse residence time χf :

o Critical dissipation rate involves evaluation of Lewis number L (via R-parameter).  
An effective L is evaluated at the flame where extinction chemistry occurs: 

Dij- binary diffusion coefficient, cp – mixture cp,  and  ρ - mixture density



Calculated and measured cool flame extinction diameters

Agreements for heptane and
octane seem reasonable, but 
dodecane extinction diameters
are over predicted appreciably, 
despite the lumped parameters.

(a) 21% O2 – He varies –displaces N2
(b) O2 varies –rest N2
(c) Xe or He displaces air

(a)

(b)

(c)



Summary & Conclusions

o Inert diluents affect the cool-flame-supported 
n-alkane droplet combustion substantially, 
through heat-transfer and diffusion processes, 
and not by influencing chemical-kinetic rates.

o A simplified, quasi-steady theory can be used 
to predict the burning rates and to a large 
extent extinction diameters when 
thermodynamic and transport properties are 
selected appropriately. A recipe for such 
selection is presented here. 

o Extinction-diameter correlations suggest that 
the currently available chemical-kinetic 
descriptions are adequate for lower normal 
alkanes, while further study is needed for 
higher alkanes.

o Xenon decreases burning rates substantially, 
but can sustain cool flames at much lower 
oxygen concentrations compared to helium.


	Slide Number 1
	Slide Number 2
	Slide Number 3
	Slide Number 4
	Slide Number 5
	Slide Number 6
	Slide Number 7
	Slide Number 8
	Slide Number 9
	Slide Number 10

