





































50th International Conference on Environmental Systems ICES-2021-15 
12-15 July 2021 

The effect of reduced pressure on the characteristics of 

spreading flames 

Luca Carmignani1, Michael J. Gollner2 and Carlos Fernandez-Pello32 

University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 94720, USA 

Maria Thomsen4 

Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile 

Sonia Fereres 53 

Abengoa Innovación, Sevilla, 41014, Spain 

and 

David Urban6 and Gary A. Ruff74 

NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135, USA 

Flame spread over solid fuels is a canonical problem in fire science, due to its direct 

implications on material flammability and importance in fire development. In a microgravity 

environment, such as onboard a spacecraft, flames can behave very differently than on Earth. 

This is concerning for spaceflight life safety, especially in higher-oxygen environments. Due to 

the difficulties associated with microgravity testing, low-pressure environments have been 

proposed as an alternative to approximately replicate the burning behavior of solid fuels 

observed in reduced gravity conditions because of similar diffusion and heat transfer 

mechanisms. However, the roles played by gravity and pressure on flame length, standoff 

distance, and flame spread rate vary with the burning configuration. In concurrent flame 

spread, the buoyant flow enhances the spread rate by bringing the flame closer to the fuel 

surface and increasing the heating of the solid fuel. In opposed flame spread, the sample is 

preheated by the flame ahead of the flame leading edge, which is strongly affected by the 

surrounding flow field. In this work, we consider flames spreading over thin cotton samples 

in both downward (opposed) and upward (concurrent) configurations to investigate the effect 

of pressure (30-100 kPa) on flame characteristics, such as spread rate and standoff distance. 

A small forced flow is induced upward so that the flames are exposed to a mixed (forced and 

free) flow. By reducing pressure, flames become less bright, their standoff distance increases, 

and their spread rates decrease similar to what is observed in low-gravity environments. These 

results could in help understanding the differences between flames spreading at low pressure 

and low gravity environments for these similar, yet very different, spreading configurations. 

They could also provide more information about potential Earth-based flammability testing 

of materials for spacecraft applications. 

 
1 Postdoctoral researcher, Mechanical Engineering Dept., 60 Hesse Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720. 
2 Assistant Professor and Deb Faculty Fellow, Mechanical Engineering, 6105A Etcheverry Hall, Berkeley, CA, 94720. 
3 Professor of the Graduate School, Mechanical Engineering, Berkeley, CA, 94720. 
4 Faculty of Engineering and Science, Diagonal Las Torres 2640, Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile. 
5 Engineer, Aerospace & Defense Division, Energía Solar 1, 41014 Sevilla, Spain 
6 Branch Chief, Low-Gravity Exploration Technology Branch, MS 77-5, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 

44135. 
7Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration Project Manager, Exploration Systems Office, MS 162-7, 21000 Brookpark 

Road, Cleveland, OH 44135. 



 

International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 

 

2 

I. Introduction 

LAME spread over solid fuels has been studied for decades because of its importance in fire safety. The nature of 

a fuel, the conditions under which it ignites and burns, and its interactions with the surroundings determine the 

rate of growth and heat released by the fire. In confined habitats, especially when escape routes are not available and 

ventilation is limited, such as onboard a spacecraft, a fire or even a small flame could have catastrophic consequences. 

This is increasingly relevant as we look towards long duration space flight and the potential of reduced pressure, 

increased oxygen concentrations atmospheres (Space Exploration Atmospheres, SEA)1. Therefore, understanding the 

physics behind spreading flames is important for life and habitat safety aboard spacecraft.  

On Earth gravity, flames naturally generate their own flow fields as buoyancy induces upward currents 

proportional to the density difference between hot post-combustion gaseous products and the ambient air. In 

microgravity this buoyant flow field is extremely weak and comparable to diffusive flows, and flames may not spread 

without externally generated flows, such as the low velocity flows generated in spacecraft by heating, ventilation, and 

cooling systems (HVAC). Spreading flames are generally divided into two main categories: concurrent flame spread, 

where the direction of propagation is the same as that of an oncoming flow field, including upward-spreading flames 

on Earth, and counter-current or opposed-flow flame spread, where the flame moves against an incoming flow. 

Concurrent-flow flame spread is known to be more hazardous than opposed-flow flame spread in a terrestrial 

environment. Concurrent spread is characterized by an acceleratory portion in which the flame grows over the 

flammable material due to the increased buoyancy induced flows caused by the larger surface burning. However, it 

has been shown that in a low-gravity environment opposed-flow flames can grow more easily than concurrent 

spreading flames because of a fresh supply of oxidizer2, and sometimes burn under conditions where extinguishment 

would occur on Earth3-5. 

The challenges associated with microgravity experiments (cost, duration, safety regulations, among others) make 

testing in space or other microgravity facilities difficult, so researchers have to look at alternative methods to test the 

flammability of materials to be used in spacecraft environments. A possible approach is to use reduced ambient 

pressure, and consequently reduced density, to reproduce the burning characteristics observed in microgravity 
conditions. As the pressure is reduced, flames tend to move away from the fuel surface, and the boundary layer along 

the solid fuel becomes thicker6. Furthermore, this behavior causes a reduced heating of the fuel surface by the flame, 

that results in lower spread rate and flame length. Thus, the effect of reducing the ambient pressure has similar 

consequences as reducing the buoyant flow velocity in low gravity. Previous experiments suggest that reduced 

pressures ranging between 20-40 kPa may be able to simulate concurrent flames in microgravity in terms of flame 

spread rate and flame length7-9, at least for thin combustible materials. Furthermore, models involving a constant 

Grashof number have been successful in correlating partial gravity results10. However, there are some limitations to 

the comparison between low gravity and low pressure. Numerical studies and scaling analyses highlighted the 

importance of radiation losses in reduced pressure environments11-13. At the same time, diffusion processes become 

more important because of the lower molecular density. This, in combination with different heating mechanisms and 

pressure effects on chemical kinetics, can change the flame structure14-18. 

The comparison between concurrent flame spread rates over fabric and acrylic fuels at reduced pressure on Earth 

and in microgravity has given promising results when a mixed flow field is considered (given by a buoyant component 

depending on pressure and gravity and a forced component)7,8,10. However, similar models have not been effective in 

comparing the terrestrial and microgravity results for opposed flame spread over acrylic rods19, suggesting that the 

heat transfer from the flame to the solid fuel is affected differently in this flame spread configuration. The different 

behavior of opposed and concurrent flames could be due to the different role played by the problem geometry; in 

concurrent flame spread, the flame develops from the upstream sample edge, and covers a large portion of the fuel 

(generally increasing in time). On the other hand, opposed-spreading flames develops from the downstream edge of 

the sample, preheating only the fuel ahead of the flame leading edge. This makes the opposed flames much slower, 

and usually steady, but also more susceptible to the ambient conditions such as flow velocity. 

The comparison between low gravity and low pressure flame spread needs to account for differences related to the 

heat transfer mechanisms (i.e. heating of fuel surface, and importance of radiation), flow field (importance of 

buoyancy), and chemical kinetics, and these factors can play different roles based on the flame spread configuration. 

In this work, we compare the effect of reduced pressure on opposed and concurrent flames spreading over thin cotton 

samples. Specifically, we present flame spread rate, standoff distance and flame length variations with pressure. A 

previously developed theoretical analysis is expanded to study the correlation between predicted and measured 

standoff distance; opposed and concurrent spreading flames show a similar trend when reasonable length scales are 

F 



 

International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 

 

3 

used for the prediction. These results should 

help further the understanding the effect of 

pressure on the heating of the fuel surface. 

II. Experimental setup 

The normal gravity experiments were 

conducted in an apparatus previously 

developed to study the flammability of solid 

combustible materials under varied ambient 

conditions7,8. The apparatus consists of a 

laboratory scale combustion tunnel that is 

inserted in a pressure chamber (Figure 1). 

The tunnel has a 125 mm square cross 

section and a 600 mm total length. The first 

350 mm section of the duct serves as a flow 

straightener, the other 250 mm segment of 

the duct is used as the test section. The 

chamber is provided with a flow system that provides constant supply and exhaust of gases to avoid vitiation problems. 

Compressed house air was supplied through critical nozzles (O’Keefe Controls) to the bottom of the duct while 

constantly evacuating to maintain constant pressure inside the chamber. The chamber pressure was controlled by a 

high-capacity vacuum generator (Vaccon JS-300) and a mechanical vacuum regulator. The chamber pressure was 

monitored constantly with an electronic pressure transducer (Omega Engineering, Inc. PX303-015A5V). The tests 

were conducted in air under pressures ranging between 30 and 100 ± 2 kPa. The forced flow was adjusted to provide 

20 cm/s at the respective chamber pressure for all tests, this velocity was selected to match the flow of air induced by 

the HVAC system inside of a spacecraft. In addition to the forced flow, because the experiments were performed 

under Earth’s gravity, the flame is also exposed to a self-induced buoyant flow. Thus, during the experiments the 
flame is exposed to a mixed (free and forced) flow condition. 

The direction of the flow was upward, with the flames spreading downward (in opposed flow configuration) by 

igniting the sample at the top, and upward (in concurrent flow configuration) by igniting the sample at the bottom. 

The samples consisted of thin cotton fabric made out of pure cotton and had an overall area density of 21.8 mg/cm2. 

The rectangular samples were held in between two identical stainless-steel frames 0.6 mm thick, with a rectangular 

opening of 150 mm long by 50 mm wide that served as the test area. Each sample was placed vertically at the midplane 

of the test section. Ignition of the material was induced with a 29-gage Kanthal 45 mm length wire. The igniter is 

energized using a controlled current power supply (BK Precision 1785) set to deliver 40 W for about 10 s. The igniter 

was braided along the upstream edge of the sample (bottom of the sample) for the concurrent flames experiments, 

whereas for the opposed ones it was braided along the downstream edge of the sample (top of the sample). The 

concurrent spread experiments were repeated five times for each test condition to address the experimental uncertainty, 

whereas three repetitions were sufficient for downward spreading flames because of their steadiness and higher 

repeatability. 

The ignition and subsequent flame spread were video recorded with a resolution of 1920 by 1080 at 30 frames per 

second using a Sony RX10-III camera for the front view, and a second camera (Nikon D3200) was used to record 

videos of the flame side view with a resolution of 1920 by 1080 at 30 frames per second. The camera settings were 

kept constant among the experiments, although they slightly differ between front view and side view. The experiments 

videos were processed using a Python-based program, called Flame Tracker, internally developed and now publicly 

available20. The color tracking method, based on intensity thresholds for each pixel in the RGB channels, was used to 

isolate the flame region from the background on a frame-by-frame basis, and the minimum and maximum coordinates 

were identified as flame base and tip locations. The flame length is directly calculated as the difference between these 

two locations. The Flame Tracker also calculated the spread rates between all the frames considered (both for flame 

base and flame tip); these values were smoothed with a moving average, with a number of frames between 10 and 30, 

corresponding to a time average of 0.3 and 1 s. In this work we report the spread rate values of the flame base for the 

opposed flow configuration, and the ones of the flame tip for the concurrent flow configuration. 

 
Figure 1. (a) Schematic of experimental apparatus and (b) picture 

of the exterior of the vacuum chamber. 

 



 

International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 

 

4 

III. Experimental Results 

A. Concurrent flames 
Figure 2 shows the frontal (on the left) and side (on the right) views of concurrent spreading flames a few seconds 

after ignition, at the tested pressure levels. Camera settings are maintained constant with variating pressure to 

qualitatively show the visual differences of the observed flames. From the side flames we can notice that by reducing 

pressure the flames become dimmer, and the turbulence and flickering at the tip of the flames gradually disappear. 

From these images we can also notice that the flame region becomes thicker (along the direction perpendicular to the 

fuel surface) despite the lower luminosity, suggesting that diffusion processes get increasingly important. An 

interesting feature shown by the photographs of the flames starting at pressures below 60 kPa is the location of the 

blue portion of the flame. Diffusion flames are controlled by the transport of the fuel and oxidizer toward the reaction 

zone. Naturally we would expect a larger supply of fresh oxidizer on the outer side of the flame zone (oxidizer side), 

while we expect a larger fuel concentration in the inner side (fuel side). Consequently, the sooty region of the flame, 

characterized by the yellow-orange color, develops on the fuel side, while the flame leading edge and the outer layer 

have a blue color characteristic of CH radicals’ emissions in contact with the oxidizer, although usually this layer is 

not visible because of the much lower luminosity with respect of the sooty region. However, as shown in Figure 2, the 

blue region of the flame moves towards the fuel side at low pressure. From these images it is not clear if the internal 

blue layer is not visible at higher pressures or if it is not present at all. A similar effect is visible in the side flames at 

reduced pressure in Ref. 10. An inner blue region with 

an outer red halo was observed also in microgravity 

flames (drop tower tests) at very low pressures (~5 kPa) 

by Marcum et al.21; the red region was associated to a 

two-stage reaction zone following the leak of reactants 

such as CO and H2 slowly reacting to CO2 and H2O. 

However, the pressure levels considered in this work 

are much higher, and by a visual comparison with Ref. 

21, the flame inversion might have a different nature, 

especially since the red region in the flame pictures of 

Figure 2 seems generated by soot radiation emission. 

The blue region could indicate that the oxidizer can 

better penetrate to the fuel side because of the enhanced 

diffusion at low pressure, or that it could enter from the 

quenching zone by the flame leading edge; despite the 

reason, this behavior has not been observed in 

microgravity. 

Upward spreading flames grow over time, and so do 

their spread rates. Given the total length of the samples 

 
Figure 2. Frontal (left frame) and lateral (right frame) view of concurrent spreading flames over thin cotton 

samples for the tested pressure levels. 

 

 
Figure 3. Variation of the spread rate (left axis), and 

time needed by the flame to cover the entire sample 

length (right axis) with pressure for upward spreading 

flames over cotton samples. 



International Conference on Environmental Systems 

5 

considered in this work (about 150 

mm), the tip of the flame reached the 

end of the sample before substantial 

movements of the flame base. 

Instantaneous values of the spread 

rate for the flame tip were obtained 

from the front videos on a frame by 

frame basis (starting when the igniter 

was turned off), and then smoothed 

by using a moving average of 10 

frames (0.3 s) for pressures above 60 

kPa, and 30 frames (1 s) for the lower 

pressure levels. These spread rate 

values, which increased over time, 

were then averaged over the time 

needed by the flame to cover the 

entire sample, for all the repetitions 

of the experiments. Figure 3 shows 

these average spread rate values as 

function of ambient pressure, as well 

as the spreading time of the flame tip. The standard deviation reflects the variation of the spread rate values during the 

experiments, and not among the repetitions; this explains the large error bars. Overall, we can see that the spread rate 

substantially decreases with pressure, with the only exception being the flames at 40 kPa; these flames tended to shrink 

after the igniter was turned off, followed by a few seconds of very slow growth before quickly gaining intensity and 

covering the entire sample. This could be seen as an intermediate behavior between the flames at 60 kPa that grew 

relatively quickly, and the flames at 30 kPa, which had a much more gradual growth. However, the initial behavior 

could also be related to a slower ignition process due to the reduced pressure. This transition of flame behavior can 

also be observed by the spreading times reported in Fig. 3; from 100 kPa to 60 kPa, the flames reached the end of the 

samples in less than 5 seconds in all cases, with small dependence on pressure. On the other hand, the spreading time 

starts increasing at 40 kPa, and at 30 kPa it becomes more than four times larger than at 100 kPa. 

B. Opposed flames

Figure 4 shows the front and lateral views of opposed spreading flames over the cotton samples about 20 s after

ignition at the tested pressure levels. At 40 kPa the flame could not propagate along the sample after ignition, thus in

the opposed spread configuration we reached a non-propagation (extinction) limit, while concurrent flames were able

to spread at much lower pressures.

As in the concurrent case, by reducing pressure the flames get dimmer, their reaction zone becomes thicker (visible 

from the side view), and the blue region develops along 

the internal layer of the flame between 50-60 kPa. The 

flame length does not seem to be strongly impacted by 

pressure reductions. 

The opposed spread videos were processed to 

measure the variation of flame position, length and 

spread rate in time, which reached steady state soon after 

ignition, unlike the case of concurrent spreading flames 

that grew over time. Figure 5 shows the variation of 

flame spread rate and flame length with pressure, 

averaged among the experiment repetitions. While the 

spread rate decreases of about 20 % from 1.20 mm/s at 

100 kPa to 0.95 mm/s at 50 kPa, the flame length does 

not show a clear trend. These results are consistent with 

the thermal theory of opposed flame spread, which 

predicts small variations of spread rate with pressure22. 

From the comparison of the flame pictures in Figure 

2 and Figure 4 (not in the same scale), it is also seen that 

Figure 5. Variation of the measured spread rates (left

axis), and flame length (right axis) with pressure for

opposed spreading flames.

Figure 4. Frontal and lateral views of opposed spreading flames. The 

spread rate and length of these flames reach steady state soon after 

ignition. 

Figure 5. Variation of the measured spread rates (left 
axis), and flame length (right axis) with pressure for 

opposed spreading flames. 



International Conference on Environmental Systems 

6 

the flame lengths are much larger for concurrent spreading flames than for opposed spreading flames. This is due to 

the difference geometrical configuration of the burning surface; in concurrent flame spread a flame spreads on each 

side of the cotton sheet, the pyrolysis region is determined by the rate of spread of the burning front and the pyrolysis 

front, and it is followed by a relatively long preheating region downstream of the pyrolysis front23, where the flames 

on each side are guided by the momentum boundary layer. In opposed flow flame spread, the solid fuel ends at the 

burn out edge, and the flames from both sides of the cotton sheet converge into a single flame, burning in a wake type 

diffusion flame. 

C. Standoff distance

The flame standoff distance is an important parameter in flame spread modeling because of its relation to the heat

transfer between fuel surface and flame region, and dependence on ambient conditions. A common assumption for 

flames burning in atmospheric conditions is the flame-sheet approximation (infinitely thin flame), resulting from 

infinitely fast kinetics and no products dissociation24. In reality, finite-rate chemistry and diffusion cause the flame to 

have a finite thickness, especially at low pressures. The importance of the standoff distance can vary with the flame 

spreading configuration; since the concurrent flames 

developed over flat fuels cover a much larger fuel area 

than opposed spreading flames, variations of standoff 

distance could play a bigger role in the first case. 

To quantify the effect of pressure on the standoff 

distance, the side videos of concurrent flames spreading 

over the cotton surface were processed to measure the 

maximum distance from the fuel surface to the outer 

flame region. Because of the thickness of the flame, we 

refer to this measured length as maximum flame 

standoff distance. The measured values for concurrent 

flames are reported in Figure 6, and error bars are 

presented showing the variability between repetitions at 

similar conditions. As mentioned before, the tip of 

concurrent flames oscillates for pressures between 60-

100 kPa, thus only the laminar portion of the flame was 

considered for the tracking, as shown in the inset of the 

figure (the shaded upper region was neglected for these 

measurements). From the graph of Figure 6, we can see 

that the maximum distance increases of about 50% 

going from 100 to 30 kPa for concurrent flames.  

Figure 6 also presents the results for the flames 

spreading downward in the opposed flow configuration. 

It can be seen that a similar increase in the maximum standoff distance occurs for opposed spreading flames as for 

concurrent spreading flames in the smaller range 100-50 kPa. Furthermore, from the measurements it was observed 

that the standoff distance was not function of time, and small oscillations decreased at lower pressures, as indicated 

by the lower standard deviation in Figure 6 for the values below 50 kPa.  

IV. Simplified Analysis and Discussion

In both concurrent and opposed flame spread, the flow velocity approaching the flame region is an important 

parameter of the problem since it controls the residence time of the oxidizer. The flames tested in this work were 

exposed to a forced flow velocity of 20 cm/s, and the buoyant flow generated by these flames is of the same order of 

magnitude (10-50 cm/s). Thus, the flow velocity affecting the boundary layer along the sample and the flame itself 

are exposed to a mixed (forced and free) flow. This type of situation has been previously studied theoretically25-27. 

Specifically, a relation for the flame standoff distance 𝑦𝑓 was derived in terms of non-dimensional parameters
27:

𝑦𝑓 = (Re
4 + Gr 2)−1/8𝑥 ∫ [1 + θ (

𝑇𝑤

𝑇∞
− 1)] 𝑑

η𝑓
0

η (1) 

Figure 6. Variation of the measured standoff distance 
with pressure for concurrent and opposed spreading 

flames. The green dashed lines represent pressure 

dependencies of 𝒑−𝟎.𝟓. The inset shows how the laminar 
region was considered to measure the maximum 

distance between fuel surface and flame. 



International Conference on Environmental Systems 

7 

With Re = 𝑉𝑔 𝑥/ν being the Reynolds number, Gr = 𝑔𝛽Δ𝑇𝑥
3 /ν2 the Grashof number, θ a non dimensional

temperature parameter, and x the local coordinate along the fuel; the other parameters are kinematic viscosity (ν), flow 
velocity (𝑉𝑔 ), gravity (g), thermal expansion coefficient (β), the integration variable for the coordinate y (),  the wall 

and ambient temperatures (𝑇𝑤 and 𝑇∞), and temperature difference between flame and surroundings (Δ𝑇). The standoff 
distance increases with the coordinate along the sample x, but this is not the case for opposed spreading flames, where 

the flames on each side of the sample reattach after the pyrolysis region, as discussed in Sec. III.B (see Figure 4). 

However, since we are interested in the flame leading edge region, which is the one determining the spread along the 

sample, we can ignore the wake region of opposed spreading flames for this analysis. 

For simplicity, we can assume a constant value of the coordinate 𝑥 in Eq. (1), equal to a length scale of the problem 
𝐿. Reynolds and Grashof numbers in Eq. (1) may be described by different characteristic lengths; the development 
length of the boundary layer in front of the flame determines Re, while the Gr number measures the buoyant flow 
generated by the flame, with length scales of the order of pyrolysis or flame lengths. However, in first approximation 

we can assume a single characteristic length. Moreover, the integral term in Eq. (1) is of order 1 and does not dependent 

on pressure, thus we can rewrite Eq. (1) as: 

𝑦𝑓 ∼ (Re
4 + Gr 2)−1/8𝐿 (2) 

This equation is valid for a mixed flow, and in the cases where Re ≫ Gr, or Gr ≫ Re, we would obtain respectively 
the standoff variation in a flow dominated by the forced or buoyant components. 

The buoyant flow induced by a flame is given by the density difference between the flame region and the 

surroundings. Therefore, we can rewrite the Grashof number in terms of the density difference between the flame 

region and the surrounding environment. The pressure dependencies of Gr and Re become: 

Gr = 𝑔ρΔρ𝐿3/μ2   →   ρΔρ = ρ∞(ρ∞ − ρ𝑓 ) ∼ 𝑝∞
2 (3) 

Re = ρ𝑉𝑔 𝐿/μ ∼ 𝑝∞  (4) 

The density of the flame region ρ𝑓  is much lower than the ambient density because of the high temperature, 

therefore we expect a low dependence of 𝜌𝑓 on the ambient pressure, therefore ρ∞ − ρ𝑓 ∝ 𝑝∞ . By substituting the 

pressure dependencies from Eq. (3) and (4) in Eq. (2), we can estimate the variation of the standoff distance with 

pressure to be 𝑦𝑓 ∼ 𝑝
−0.5. By applying a power law fitting to the measured values of the maximum standoff distance

in Figure 6, we obtain a pressure exponent of -0.33 in the case of opposed spreading flames, and -0.37 in the case of 

concurrent spreading flames. The green dashed lines in Figure 6 correspond to a 𝑝−0.5 dependence, and they fit within
the error bars of the experimental results. Given the limitations in measuring the standoff distance, e.g. the change of 

flame luminosity with pressure, and the thickening flame region in contrast with an infinitely thin flame sheet 

approximation (infinitely fast kinetics), the predicted and measured exponents are reasonably close. Furthermore, the 

length scale of the problem in Eq. (2) could vary with pressure as well and could be responsible of the difference in 

the pressure exponent. 

The importance of the length scales of the problem depends on the spreading configuration. The flame length of 

opposed spreading flames does not significantly affect the fuel ahead of the flame, whereas in concurrent spreading 

flames a longer flame preheats more fuel to the vaporization temperature. The pyrolysis length, on the other hand, is 

proportional to the spread rate for both opposed and concurrent spreading flames; this length is also an appropriate 

scale to estimate the buoyant flow induced by the flames. By using the definitions of Reynolds and Grashof numbers 

in Eq. (3) and (4), and the pyrolysis length 𝐿𝑝 as the characteristic length of the problem, Eq. (2) becomes:  

𝑦𝑓 ∼ (
𝐿𝑝μ∞

ρ∞
)

1/2
(𝑉𝑔

4 + 𝑔2𝐿𝑝
2 Δρ

2

ρ∞
2 )

−1/8

(5) 

We can estimate the variation of the standoff distance with the experimental conditions of 𝑉𝑔  = 20 cm/s, g =

9.81m/s2, density and viscosity calculated at the ambient temperature (𝑇∞ = 300 K), respectively 1.16 kg/m
3 and

1.8510-5 kg/(ms), and by assuming a constant density in the flame region of 0.17 kg/m3 obtained at a flame 

temperature of 2100 K. The value of the pyrolysis length 𝐿𝑝  changes between the spreading configurations. 

Furthermore, previous experiments for concurrent spread have shown that 𝐿𝑝 is function of pressure
7, but since in this



International Conference on Environmental Systems 

8 

work we consider the standoff distance for the 

developed flame, it is reasonable to assume that the 

flame already spread through the entire sample, and 

therefore 𝐿𝑝 = 150mm. The pyrolysis length is 

function of pressure also for opposed spreading flames, 

but its variation is negligible for the thin samples 

presented in this work. Thus, for simplicity we can select 

a constant value of 10 mm (same order of magnitude of 

the experimental values). 

Figure 7 shows the comparison between the 

experimental values from Figure 6, and the values 

estimated from Eq. (5) with a multiplication factor of 5. 

It is interesting to notice that the standoff distance for 

opposed flames follows the same trend of the values for 

concurrent flame spread, despite the fundamental 

differences between these two configurations. 

V. Conclusion 

Experiments of opposed and concurrent flame 

spread configurations were carried on over thin cotton 

samples at ambient pressure between 30-100 kPa. Overall, a pressure reduction slows down the flame spread, makes 

the flames dimmer, and causes a thickening of the reaction zone and an increase of flame standoff distance. It was 

found that opposed flames were not able to spread after ignition at 40 kPa, even though the spread rate at 50 kPa is 

still close to the one at 100 kPa; this suggests that low pressure extinction is not a gradual behavior, but rather a sudden 

mechanism that could be due to the effect of pressure on the flame structure and the fuel surface preheating.  

Interestingly, at 60 kPa a thin blue region appears near the middle of the diffusion flame, and as the pressure is 

reduced this blue region moves towards the fuel surface. This is in contrast with common diffusion flames at 

atmospheric pressure where the blue region is on the oxidizer side of the flame. 

The standoff distance, measured as the maximum distance of the flame region from the fuel surface, increases in 

both opposed and concurrent spread at lower pressures. A simplified analysis is used to study the pressure dependence 

of the standoff distance for a mixed (forced and free) flow, and the result of 𝑝−0.5 is close to the experimental values
for opposed spread (𝑝−0.33 ), and concurrent spread (𝑝−0.37). The difference could be attributed to the characteristic
length of the problem, that could vary with pressure as well. 

By assuming a constant length equal to the pyrolysis length based on the spread configuration, the flame standoff 

distance was estimated for the tested conditions. The measured values show good agreement with the estimated values; 

moreover, opposed and concurrent spreading flames showed a common trend, despite the different order of magnitude 

of the pyrolysis length. 

The results of the standoff distance, and the comparison between opposed and concurrent spreading flames, could 

be used in future models to estimate the variation of heat flux between fuel and surface at low pressure. Numerical 

results could clarify the buoyant flow field generated by these flames. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by NASA Grant NNX12AN67A. The authors would like to thank Prof. Yuji 

Nakamura for the interesting discussions on the flame structure at low pressure. 

References 

1NASA, “Recommendations for Exploration Spacecraft Internal Atmospheres: The Final Report of the NASA Exploration 

Atmospheres Working Group,” NASA/TP-2010-216134, 2010. 
2Olson, S. L., Kashiwagi, T. , Fujita, O., Kikuchi, M., Ito, K., “Experimental observations of spot radiative ignition and 

subsequent three-dimensional flame spread over thin cellulose fuels,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 125, No. 1-2, 2001, pp. 852–864. 
3Olson, S. L., “Mechanisms of Microgravity Flame Spread Over a Thin Solid Fuel: Oxygen and Opposed Flow Effects,” 

Combust. Sci. Technol., Vol. 76, No. 4-6, 1991, pp. 233–249. 

Figure 7. Correlation between Eq. (5), multiplied by a 
factor of 5, and the measured values of the maximum 

standoff distance, for both opposed and concurrent 

spreading flames. 



 

International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 

 

9 

4Olson, S. L., Ferkul, P. V., “Microgravity flammability boundary for PMMA rods in axial stagnation flow: Experimental 

results and energy balance analyses,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 180, June 2017, pp. 217–229. 
5Olson, S. L., Ferkul, P. V., T’ien, J. S., “Near-limit flame spread over a thin solid fuel in microgravity,” Symp. (Int.) Combust. 

22, No. 1, 1989, pp. 1213–1222. 
6 Fereres, S., Lautenberger, C., Fernandez-Pello, C., Urban, D. L., Ruff, G. A., “Understanding ambient pressure effects on 

piloted ignition through numerical modeling,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 159, No. 12, 2012, pp. 3544-3553. 
7Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, C., Urban, D. L., Ruff, G. A., Olson, S. L., “On simulating concurrent flame spread in reduced 

gravity by reducing ambient pressure,” Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 37, No. 3, 2019, pp. 3793-3800. 
8Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, C., Ruff, G. A., Urban, D. L., “Buoyancy effects on concurrent flame spread over thick 

PMMA,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 199, Jan. 2019, pp. 279-291. 
9Nakamura, Y., Yoshimura, N., Ito, H., Azumaya, K., Fujita, O., “Flame spread over electric wire in sub-atmospheric pressure,” 

Proc. Combust. Inst., Vol. 32, No. 2, 2009, pp. 2559-2566. 
10Kleinhenz, J., Feier, I. I., Hsu, S.-Y., T’ien, J. S., Ferkul, P. V., Sacksteder, K. R., “Pressure modeling of upward flame spread 

and burning rates over solids in partial gravity,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 154, No. 4, 2008, pp. 637-643. 
11Ferkul, P. V., T’ien, J. S., “A model of low-speed concurrent flow flame spread over a thin fuel,” Combust. Sci. Technol., 

Vol. 99, No. 4-6, 1994, pp. 345–370. 
12Hsua, S.-Y., T'ien, J. S., “Pressure extinction limits of non-premixed flames,” Combust. Th. Model., Vol. 13, No. 5, 2009, pp. 

885-900 
13Bhattacharjee, S., Carmignani, L., “Radiation-kinetics interactions: A comparison of opposed-flow flame spread in a low-

velocity microgravity and low-pressure downward environments,” Proc. Combust. Inst., (In press), 2020. 
14Altenkirch, R. A., Eichhorn, R., Shang, P. C., “Buoyancy Effects on Flames Spreading Down Thermally Thin Fuels,” 

Combust. Flame, Vol. 37, 1980, pp. 71-83. 
15Mao, C.-P., Kodama, H., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., “Convective Structure of a Diffusion Flame over a Flat Combustible 

Surface,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 57, 1984, pp. 209-236. 
16Zhang, Y., Ronney, P. D., Roegner, E. V., Greenberg, J. B., “Lewis Number Effects on Flame Spreading Over Thin Solid 

Fuels,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 90, 1992, pp. 71-83. 
17Zarzecki, M., Quintiere, J. G., Lyon, R. E., Rossmann, T., Diez, F. J., “The effect of pressure and oxygen concentration on 

the combustion of PMMA,” Comb. Flame, Vol. 160, 2013, pp. 1519-1530. 
18Zhao, K., Zhou, X., Liu, X., Tang, W., Gollner, M., Peng, F., Yang, L., “Experimental and theoretical study on downward 

flame spread over uninhibited PMMA slabs under different pressure environments,” App. Therm. Engin., Vol. 136, 2018, pp. 1-8. 
19Thomsen, M., Fernandez-Pello, C., Huang, X., Olson, S., Ferkul, P., “Buoyancy Effect on Downward Flame Spread Over 

PMMA Cylinders,” Fire Technol., Vol. 56, Jan. 2020, pp. 247-269. 
20Carmignani, L., “Flame Tracker: an image analysis program to measure flame characteristics,” SoftwareX, April 2021 

(submitted), https://github.com/combustionTools/flameTracker. 
21Marcum, J. W., Rachow, P., Ferkul, P. V., Olson, S. L., “Low pressure flame blowoff of the stagnation region of cast PMMA 

cylinders in axial mixed convective flow,” Combust. Flame, Vol. 216, June 2020, pp. 385-397. 
22 Wichman, I.S., “Theory of opposed-flow flame spread,” Prog. En. Combust. Sci., Vol. 18, pp.553-593. 
23Markstein, G. H., de Ris, J., “Upward fire spread over textiles,” Symp. (Int.) Combust., Vol. 14, No. 1, 1973, pp. 1085-1097. 
24Williams, F. A., “Theory of combustion in laminar flows,” Annual Review Fluid Mech., Vol. 3, Jan. 1971, pp. 171-188. 
25Fernandez-Pello, A. C., “A Theoretical Model for the Upward Laminar Spread of Flames Over Vertical Fuel Surfaces," 

Combust. Flame, Vol. 31, 1978, pp. 135-148. 
26Fernandez-Pello, A. C., "Flame Spread in a Forward Forced Flow," Combust. Flame, Vol. 36, 1979, pp. 63-78. 
27Mao, C. P., Fernandez-Pello, A. C., Pagni, P. J., "Mixed Convective Burning of a Fuel Surface with Arbitrary Inclination," 

J. Heat Transf., Vol. 106, No. 2, 1984, pp. 304-309. 

https://github.com/combustionTools/flameTracker

	The effect of reduced pressure on the characteristics of spreading flames
	I. Introduction
	II. Experimental setup
	III. Experimental Results
	A. Concurrent flames
	B. Opposed flames
	C. Standoff distance

	IV. Simplified Analysis and Discussion
	V. Conclusion
	Acknowledgments
	References

