





































22 N HPGP Thruster Life Testing  

Henry W. Mulkey 

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771 

Wilhelm Dingertz 

 Bradford - ECAPS, Solna, Sweden  

 
In the ever-changing paradigm of efficient and capable spacecraft design, scientific missions continue 
pushing the envelope enabling spacecraft subsystems to deliver effective solutions to meet challenging 
new mission/spacecraft needs. From an in-space storable liquid chemical propulsion perspective, 
monopropellant hydrazine has been, and continues to be, a dependable propellant with considerable flight 
heritage, a variety of engine thrust classes available from multiple vendors, with repeatable and reliable 
performance. Additionally, the space propulsion industry has learned to successfully handle hydrazine, its 
regulations, the safety protocols, the personnel protective equipment, and the unique training standards – 
all requisite for loading spacecraft propulsion systems with toxic hypergolic hydrazine. The question now 
arises as to “what is next for in-space chemical propulsion?” Further, with the evolution and concrete 
advancements in innovative in-space green propellant technologies, capable of providing realizable 
benefits to scientific missions, concern over the reliability and availability of this higher performing and safer 
to handle class of propellants is waning. As science missions move forward with the potential flight infusion 
of High Performance Green Propulsion (HPGP), NASA and its industry partners are working to address 
any gaps in system reliability, performance, or unique operational considerations. 
 
Propellant technology that offers both higher performance and significant reduction in personnel hazards 
compared to hydrazine presents an attractive propulsion subsystem design opportunity. Increased 
propulsion subsystem performance can result in lower spacecraft launch mass, larger scientific payloads, 
or extended on-orbit lifetimes. Mission trades using green propulsion technologies have been documented 
on multiple NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) mission classes, examining various parameters 
and requirements to support mission architectures in Low Earth Orbit (LEO), High Earth Orbit (HEO), 
geostationary, lunar, planetary, and Quasi-halo orbit around Sun-Earth Lagrange point (L2). The results of 
these trade studies show promising, attainable benefits. The perceived programmatic risk of flying a newer 
propulsion technology has, unfortunately, not outweighed the benefits to date. To take advantage of the 
improved performance and mitigate programmatic risk, HPGP engines must demonstrate life testing at 
higher propellant throughputs than have currently been demonstrated.   
 
In an effort to proactively address the challenges with technology infusion into a risk-averse community, 
NASA and the Swedish National Space Agency (SNSA) outlined a collaborative Implementing Arrangement 
(IA) for the respective agencies to pursue increased HPGP technology maturation. This initial IA effort 
began in 2013, fresh off the heels of the successful PRISMA HPGP technology demonstration mission. The 
IA targeted objective is to reduce risk to potential future HPGP missions and fully characterize the LMP-
103S propellant and associated engine performance. Over the past eight years, HPGP has flown in 
propulsion systems on twenty-five (25) spacecraft from seven (7) different Launch Ranges around the globe 
and on seven (7) different Launch Vehicles. Six (6) of these launches involved multiple loading operations 
for multiple spacecraft. For U.S. Range operations, nine (9) HPGP systems have been processed at 
Vandenberg Space Force Base (VSFB): six (6) in 2017, and three (3) in 2018. Six (6) more have been 
processed at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station (CCAFS) in May 2020, with three (3) systems launched in 
June 2020 and the remaining three (3) system were left loaded and ready until their launch in August of 
2020. Three (3) more systems have been processed at Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) and launched in June 
2021. In addition, these propulsion subsystems employed heritage propulsion subsystem component such 
as valves, filters, and pressure transducers, and have further demonstrated nominal functionality in both 
diaphragm and Propellant Management Device (PDM) propellant tanks. Based on these successes, HPGP 
technology continues to be considered for NASA Science Mission Directorate missions at GSFC. 
 
 



The work presented herein represents many years of development and collaborative efforts to successfully 
align higher performance, low toxicity hydrazine alternatives into scientific missions. NASA GSFC 
Propulsion Engineering, in collaboration with Bradford ECAPS, has developed mission specific thruster 
design and testing requirements to establish GSFC’s desired test conditions and firing sequences. In 2017, 
the first flight-like 22 N HPGP thruster Engineering Qualification Model (EQM-1) was designed and built by 
Bradford ECAPS to prove out the thruster design, materials, build process, and test campaign with respect 
to NASA GSFC critical component and mission requirements. This test program was developed to 
comprehensively test the thruster, the technology, and ultimately increase the 22 N HPGP Technology 
Readiness Level (TRL). EQM-1 was tested to environmental qualification levels prior to hot fire performance 
testing to represent the relevant end-to-end environment (launch to on-orbit operation) with required margin. 
This thruster demonstrated steady-state and pulse mode operational capability with propellant thruster 
throughput up to ~53 kg. At this throughput level, the EQM-1 engine began to present off-nominal 
performance and the test campaign was halted to allow for non-destructive testing and identify the root 
cause for the anomalous performance. 
 
Capitalizing on the successful elements of the EQM-1 campaign, an upgraded 22 N HPGP EQM-2 has 
been manufactured by Bradford ECAPS to meet the complete GSFC requirements. The EQM-2 thruster’s 
test campaign has further demonstrated the robustness of the HPGP propulsion technology and increased 
the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) by undergoing a full acceptance test program, then proceeding into 
qualification, including environmental testing (vibration and shock to qualification levels), as well as hot-fire 
life testing, operating at steady-state and pulse modes with increased propellant thruster throughput to 
~150 kg. The HPGP thruster performance testing enables effective HPGP thruster readiness evaluation to 
meet NASA candidate mission requirements in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Glamor Shot of Engine 
 


