



































Determining flame temperature by broadband two color
pyrometry in a flame spreading over a thin solid in

microgravity

Maria Thomsena,∗, Juan Jose Cruzb, Felipe Escuderob, Andres Fuentesb,
Carlos Fernandez-Pelloc, Michael Gollnerc, David L. Urband, Gary A. Ruffd

aFaculty of Engineering and Sciences, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile
bDepartamento de Industrias, Universidad Técnica Federico Santa Marı́a, Av. España 1680, Valparaı́so, Chile

cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
dNASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd., Cleveland, OH, USA

Abstract

Fire spread inside a spacecraft is a constant concern in space travel. Understanding how the fire grows and
spreads, and how it can potentially be extinguished is critical for planning future missions. The conditions inside
a spacecraft can greatly vary from those encountered on earth, including microgravity, low velocity flows, reduced
ambient pressure and high oxygen, and thus affecting the combustion processes. In microgravity, the contributions
of thermal radiation from gaseous species and soot can play a critical role in the spread of a flame and the problem
has not been fully understood yet. The overall objective of this work is to address this by studying the soot
temperature of microgravity flames spreading over a thin solid in microgravity. The experiments presented here
were performed as part of the NASA project Saffire IV, conducted in orbit on board the Cygnus resupply vehicle
before it re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere. The fuel considered is a thin fabric made of cotton and fiberglass
(Sibal) exposed to a forced flow of 20 cm/s in a concurrent flow configuration. Reconstruction of the flame
temperature fields is extracted from two color broadband emission pyrometry (B2CP) as the flame propagates
over the solid fuel. A methodology, relevant assumptions and its applicability to other microgravity experiments
are discussed here. The data obtained shows that the technique provides an acceptable average temperature around
∼ 1300 K, which remains relatively constant during the spread with an error value smaller than 117 K. The data
presented in this work provides a methodology that could be applied to other microgravity experiments to be
performed by NASA. It is expected that the results will provide insight for what is to be expected in different
conditions relevant for fire safety in future space facilities.

Keywords: Broadband pyrometry; Soot temperature; Boundary layer diffusion flame; Concurrent flame spread; Sibal material.

Corresponding author: ∗ maria.thomsen@uai.cl

1



1. Introduction

Understanding the behavior, spread and growth of
a fire inside a spacecraft is essential to develop meth-
ods to prevent and respond to the occurrence of fire
accidents that could endanger the success of a mis-
sion and the safety of the crew. Currently, materi-
als used inside spacecraft cabins or the International
Space Station (ISS) are rigorously screened to charac-
terize their fire hazard and determine how they would
behave in case of a fire [1, 2]. Although ideally, the
testing of materials would be done under the actual
conditions of the cabin where it is intended to be used,
this is sometimes challenging given that testing in a
space-based facility is very expensive and very lim-
ited in available space and opportunities.

Aiming to expand the knowledge of fire spread and
growth, and material flammability in spacecraft en-
vironments, NASA embarked on a research project,
the Spacecraft Fire Experiment (Saffire) [3], that aims
to better understand material flammability and fire
growth and spread. The Saffire experiments are a se-
ries of unique and novel large-scale spacecraft exper-
iments performed on board the Cygnus cargo space-
craft, after the vehicle has completed its primary mis-
sion to the ISS, and before its planned destructive
reentry through Earth’s atmosphere. Using this ve-
hicle to perform large-scale fire experiments was an
innovative way to use a microgravity facility and al-
leviated the concern of crew safety for a large fire
experiment. The Saffire experiments have been dis-
cussed and documented previously, and the reader is
referred to Refs. [3–5] for further details. The re-
sults of the tests performed have shown that space-
craft fires could grow significantly, release enough
heat and toxic gases, and persist long enough to be
of concern to the crew and the spacecraft.

Despite efforts to better understand fire spread
mechanisms in microgravity environments, the prob-
lem is still poorly understood [6]. Traditionally, flame
spread over solid fuels has been studied in micro-
gravity by means of tracking the flame or the pyrol-
ysis front, providing useful but limited information
of the process. As the flame spreads over the solid
fuel, it acts both as the source of heat needed to py-
rolyze the virgin fuel and as a pilot that later ignites
the flammable mixture formed after the pyrolyzates
mix with the oxidizer (see Fig. 1). Knowledge of the
radiative properties of flames, in particular the tem-
perature, are important to better understand the gen-
eral process, particularly near extinction [7, 8]. Here,
color pyrometry provides a useful method to deter-
mine the temperature of the flame without disruptions
to the spread process. Previous studies have taken ad-
vantage of these techniques when studying diffusion
flames on gas burners [9–12], however only recently
the technique has been applied to spreading flames
[13–15].

The results obtained during the Saffire IV experi-
ments are revisited here to provide further informa-
tion about the characterization of the flames observed

during this unique experiment. Raw images obtained
during the tests are analyzed to determine the temper-
ature of the flame using broadband two color pyrome-
try (B2CP). It is expected that the results of this work
will provide further insight into unique data obtained
during microgravity experiments. Furthermore, this
methodology could complement point measurements
traditionally performed, providing a more complete
view of the flame temperature to be used for the
validation of numerical models in microgravity, and
thus shedding light onto the additional processes that
might play a dominant role in the spread of the flame.

Fig. 1: Diagram of concurrent flame spread over a thin sam-
ple. Only half of the flame is schematized (symmetry is as-
sumed with respect to the sample center plane).

2. Experimental setup

The data presented here correspond to experimen-
tal data obtained as part of the Saffire IV experiments
[5] performed by NASA on board the resupply ve-
hicle Cygnus CRS-15 before its destructive re-entry
through Earth’s atmosphere. A brief description about
the experimental setup and procedure is given here.
For further information, the reader is referred to Refs.
[3, 5]. The hardware, shown in Fig. 2, was a rect-
angular flow duct measuring 15 cm (perpendicular
to the sample surface) by 45 cm width and 109 cm
length. The duct was equipped with a fan at the in-
let section to induce the flow of air through the flow
duct, a vane anemometer at the entrance of the in-
let duct was used to monitor the flow velocity. The
inlet and outlet of the duct was equipped with flow
straighteners that connected to a plenum parallel to
the flow duct, resulting in a folded geometry. This
geometry favored flow mixing and enabled oxygen,
carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide concentration
measurements at the inlet and outlet sections. In ad-
dition to the Saffire instrumentation, the vehicle was
also provided with a Far Field Diagnostics unit con-
taining a smoke cleanup system and smoke sensors.

The samples tested were placed in a holder located
in the middle of the flow duct so that air flows on both
sides of the sample. As part of Saffire IV, four sepa-
rate fuel samples consisting of different materials and
sizes were used. One of them was a custom-made
combustible material, called ‘Sibal fabric’, which is
a thin composite material made of 75% cotton and
25% fiberglass with an area density of 18.05 mg/cm2,

2



Fig. 2: Schematic of the Cygnus vehicle (d), experimental setup (b, c) and sample (a).

and is the subject of this study. This material was
selected both for comparison with previous micro-
gravity tests and because the presence of the non-
combustible matrix of fiberglass provides structural
integrity and prevents the fabric from cracking and
curling while burning, as such behavior would de-
stroy the symmetry of the flame and complicate the
flame spread process. The sample was 40.64 cm wide
by 50 cm long and was mounted on a metal frame in
the center of the flow tunnel (see Fig. 2). To study
concurrent flame spread, a resistively-heated 29-gage
Kanthal-wire (0.286 mm) was threaded through the
upstream end of the sample across the entire width.
The hot-wire igniter was powered for 8 s (3.98 A, 205
W) to ensure ignition of the fuel. The Sibal sample
was burned in a concurrent configuration under a 20
cm/s flow velocity in an atmosphere of 22% by vol.
oxygen concentration and 100 kPa ambient pressure.

Four cameras (Allied Vision Manta G 235c) were
used to record images of the burning samples at 30
fps. Cameras included an IRC Hoya C-5000 IR cut
filter. Two front view cameras (C1 and C3) were po-
sitioned on one side of the duct parallel to the sample
to observe the full development of the flame over the
material. Two side view cameras (C2 and C4) were
positioned on a side of the duct, perpendicular to the
sample, to observe the profiles of the flame. Cam-
eras were configured as orthogonal pairs to image the
totality of the sample holder; however, for the pur-
pose of the present work only C1 and C2 are rele-
vant (see Fig. 2(b)). Front and side view cameras
were equipped with 6 mm (Kowa LM6HC) and 8 mm
(Kowa LM8HC) lenses, respectively, to improve vi-
sualization of the flame. The flow duct was kept dark
to improve flame imaging. However, the front of the
fuel sample was periodically (for 0.1 s every 2 s) illu-
minated with four green LED strip assemblies embed-
ded in the duct wall so that the pyrolysis front could
be seen as the material burned. Four radiometers on
the same side as the cameras measured radiation com-
ing from the flame and fuel. 11 type-R thermocouples
(130 µm wire diameter) were arrayed to provide tem-
perature measurements at key locations on and near
the entire fuel sample card tested, with only 4 of them
placed on the Sibal fabric. Furthermore, of those four
thermocouples, two were placed in direct contact with
the surface to measure surface temperature, one of

them malfunction during the test, and the remaining
one was devoted to measure gas phase temperature.
This last thermocouple was particularly relevant to the
present work, and provided the means for comparison
and validation purposes of technique presented here.
The exact position of the device was 34 cm down-
stream the leading edge of the Sibal sample, 1 cm
from the center line and 1 cm vertically away from the
sample surface to probe the temperature of the plume.

3. Methodology

3.1. Theoretical model

The basis of the color pyrometry technique is
briefly described here. The methodology presented in
this work allows the measurement of the soot temper-
ature using a conventional color camera (CMOS), em-
ploying a similar technique as developed by Jenkins
and Hanson [16]. In this approach, the flame emis-
sion is simultaneously captured at three broad spec-
tral bands to then apply pyrometry analysis. Never-
theless, is should be noted that the methodology pre-
sented in Ref. [16] uses a pulsed laser to sequentially
measure the soot concentration (laser extinction) and
soot temperature (flame emission). In this case, dur-
ing the SAFFIRE campaign only flame emission mea-
surements were carried out. Thus a variation of the
technique had to be considered.

When imaging flames in spectral regions in which
the emission is dominated by soot, the measured sig-
nal intensity represents the soot emission integrated
along the line-of-sight. However, the intensity of light
reaching the photo-detector can be attenuated due to
the absorption and scattering of adjacent soot parti-
cles. Considering that the soot particle size is small
enough to be within the Rayleigh regime, scattering
effects can be neglected when compared with the ef-
fect of absorption [17]. Thus, the soot emission along
a line-of-sight l across the flame, at a wavelength λ,
may be described by the radiative transfer equation
(RTE) [18]

dIλ
dl

+ κλIλ = Jλ(l) (1)

where Jλ(l) = κλI
bb
λ represents the emission of the

flame. κλ is the soot absorption coefficient and Ibbλ is

3



the blackbody radiative intensity defined by Planck’s
law at the soot temperature Ts, which in turn is as-
sumed to be in local thermal equilibrium with the gas-
phase. The solution of the radiative transfer equation
along the line-of-sight of the photo-detector l allows
the definition of the flame radiative intensity emitted
and self-absorbed by soot particles for a given wave-
length, Iλ, and can be expressed as:

Iλ(l, Ts) =∫
l

κλ(l)I
bb
λ (Ts) exp

[
−
∫
l′
κλ(l

′) dl′
]
dl. (2)

Assuming that the soot particles generated by the
combustion process are small enough to be within
the Rayleigh regime, the soot absorption coefficient
can be related to the local soot volume fraction fv
and the soot absorption function Em through κλ =
fv6πEm/λ [17]. Here, the model of Chang and
Charalampopoulos [19] is considered for the soot ab-
sorption function. The exponential term in Eq. 2 rep-
resents the self-absorption along the flame path to
the photodetector. This term becomes important for
flames with large optical thickness; however, it can
be neglected if the flame is considered to be optically
thin [20]. In the present work, the soot temperature is
measured considering the flame to be optically thin,
and thus the effect of the self-absorption term is ig-
nored.

When using an RGB camera, the radiative intensity
of the flame Iλ is affected by the sensitivity of the de-
tection system (ηλ). Furthermore, the photo-detector
captures an intensity that is spectrally integrated in a
broadband. Thus, the intensity captured by the sensor
at each color channel can be defined as

Si =

∫
λi

ηλIλ(l, Ts)dλ, (3)

with i ∈ {R, G, B}. Assuming that the soot volume
fraction remains relatively constant along the optical
path, a color pyrometry ratio can be defined as done
in [13, 21],

Θ2S =
Si

Sj
=

∫
λi

ηλ
Em
λ

Ibbλ (Ts) dλ∫
λj

ηλ
Em
λ

Ibbλ (Ts) dλ
. (4)

From Eq. 4, Ts can then be obtained by employing
an iterative procedure in which experimentally ob-
tained ratios of intensities captured (LHS) are com-
pared with the values obtained from the theoretical
model (RHS) evaluated at different Ts. Similarly, a
three-color ratio can also be defined by using a modi-
fied version of Eq. 4 with Θ3S = (SiSj)/(S

2
k) [21].

3.2. Assessment of the model assumption

A deconvolution procedure is needed to convert the
line-of-sight integrated signal captured by the camera
into the local properties of interest. Unfortunately,

this procedure requires knowledge of the flame ge-
ometry or the distribution of local properties within
the flame, which is not the case for this micrograv-
ity flame. For this reason, it is assumed that the
flame properties can be represented by a mean value
H̄i of the local flame emission Hi defined as Si =∫
l
Hi(l)dl where l is the optical path through the

flame to the camera. Note that the self-absorption has
been neglected. Thus, the integrated flame emission
can be written as Si = H̄i∆l where the overbar de-
notes the mean along the line-of-sight. As the optical
length is equal for the different broadbands, consid-
ering a mean Hi (or for constant properties along the
optical path), a ratio of deconvoluted signals Hi (ΘH )
is equivalent to a ratio of integrated signals Si (ΘS ,
see Fig. 1 for reference of where the ratios are com-
puted). This hypothesis is usually not fulfilled, but
alleviates the need for knowledge of flame geometry.
Therefore, its impact on the retrieved temperature is
assessed on a well-known flame geometry. Although
the nature and geometry of the flames compared here
is different to those encountered during the µg exper-
iments, the purpose of this section is to address the
validity of the established assumptions in the pres-
ence of high temperature and high soot volume frac-
tion gradients along the medium.

A laminar coflow ethylene-air diffusion flame was
used for validating the methodology. Details of the
experiments, calibration and simulations used in this
section can be found elsewhere [21]. The deconvo-
luted values of Hi are obtained either from exper-
imental measurements or synthetic signals of Si at
three broad spectral bands. A synthetic validation is
first performed. For this purpose, simulations of the
signals captured by the RGB camera channels were
conducted, using simulated values of temperature and
soot volume fraction from a CoFlame simulation [22]
as described in detail in [21]. The line-of-sight inte-
grated signals can then be treated to retrieve a tem-
perature that can be compared against the reference
temperature provided by the simulation, as done in
Fig. 3. The retrieved temperatures using deconvolu-
tion are very similar to the reference. The differences
are attributed to the neglect of self-absorption for this
procedure, a hypothesis that is required for the model.
This effect is not important for low optical thickness,
but may cause differences around 100 K for high soot
volume fraction zones [23]. The temperatures re-
trieved without deconvoluting the signals are shown
on the second row of Fig. 3(a). These temperatures
are always higher than those using deconvolution, es-
pecially in zones near the flame centerline, where the
flame optical thickness is highest and the hypothesis
of constant properties along the camera line-of-sight
is less correct. More detailed results supporting the
discussion are shown on Fig. 3(b) through four radial
profiles at different heights above the burner (HABs).
Although the temperature retrieved without perform-
ing the deconvolution procedure is incorrectly deter-
mined as compared to the reference, its prediction is
within 100 K and results on a higher temperature,

4



which can be thought as a safety margin for engineer-
ing applications.

Fig. 3: (a) Temperature fields of CoFlame (first column) and
retrieved using the deconvoluted ratios ΘH (first row) and
the ratios of signals captured by the camera ΘS (second row,
not deconvoluted). Colorbars denote the temperature in K.
(b) Temperature profiles for the R/G and BG/R2 signal ratios
for four heights above the burner (HAB).

To complement the numerical analysis, experimen-
tal temperatures retrieved from the ratio of Hi are
shown on the first row of Fig. 4(a), whereas those
retrieved from the ratio of Si are shown on the sec-
ond row. The classical behavior of the deconvolu-
tion process is observed on the temperatures retrieved
from local ratios of Hi, where the signal noise is
propagated and enhanced toward the flame center-
line. On the other hand, these issues are not ob-
served by directly using the ratio of signals captured
by the camera Si, presenting a smooth and more uni-
form temperature field, at the cost of lower accuracy.
Fig. 4(b) shows radial temperature profiles for four
heights above the burner from 20 to 50 mm from de-
convoluted (continuous) and integrated (dashed) ra-
tios. Results are shown for the G/R and BG/R2 chan-
nel combinations in red and black, respectively. The
assumption of constant Hi within the optical path is
propagated to the temperature radial profiles, which
remain approximately constant until reaching a peak

Fig. 4: (a) Experimental temperature fields retrieved using
the deconvoluted ratios ΘH (first row) and the ratios of sig-
nals captured by the camera ΘS (second row, not deconvo-
luted). Colorbars denote the temperature in K. (b) Temper-
ature profiles for the R/G and BG/R2 signal ratios for four
heights above the burner (HAB).

at the flame wings. Nevertheless, these results are
within 100 K of difference with the deconvoluted re-
sults, similar to numerical results. The maximum dif-
ferences are observed near the flame centerline. The
peak temperature is well captured in magnitude, but
it is shifted between 0.1 to 0.3 mm toward the flame
centerline as compared to the reference. The best
agreement is found in regions where the optical thick-
ness is low, i.e., low soot volume fraction and flame
radius, such as the flame tip. This is observed on the
profiles at an HAB = 50 mm. Although there are
differences between the proposed and reference ap-
proaches, these are not significant from an engineer-
ing standpoint. Therefore, this methodology allows
for estimation of the mean temperature values using a
commercial RGB camera.

3.3. Calibration procedure

All the cameras used in the Saffire Experiments
were previously calibrated following the NIST cali-
bration standards using equipments certified in accor-
dance with ANSI/NCSL Z540-1-1994 [24]. The cal-

5



ibration of the cameras was performed using a certi-
fied blackbody source(Mikron M360) with tempera-
tures that ranged between 973 and 1373 K. As part
of this calibration procedure, images are taken in raw
and bmp format under conditions of operation simi-
lar to those considered for the experiments. Simulta-
neously, multiple image settings are also considered.
More specifically, the exposure time was varied be-
tween 60 and 29997, and the gain value was changed
between 0 and 39 dB.

During the experiments, images of the flame as
it spreads over the solid are recorded in RAW and
JPEG formats. RAW images can then be postpro-
cessed and converted to TIFF to proceed with the
application of the broadband two color pyrometry
(B2CP) technique presented above to probe temper-
ature fields from the frames captured within visible
spectrum. To ensure that no additional processing and
alterations to the image are done during the conver-
sion process, the (B2CP) technique is applied to the
calibration images to verify the procedure. For this,
the RHS of Eq. 4 was solved using the emissivity and
temperature of the blackbody calibration source in-
stead of the Em/λ and Ts terms, respectively. Figure
5(a) shows a comparison between theoretical intensi-
ties ratios (Si/Sj) presented as solid line functions
and measured intensity ratios from calibration im-
ages ((Si/Sj)exp)) shown as circular symbols. From
the figure it can be noted that the measured inten-
sity ratio and the expected value at the temperature of
the furnace are clearly different, suggesting that the
camera adds additional processing to the files when
recording them. Furthermore, the intensity of the ob-
ject recorded by the sensor depends directly on the
camera settings used, which during the experiments
were set automatically. Thus, a correction factor is
needed in order to extract appropriate values.

Given the dependence of the intensity data
recorded by the sensor on the camera settings, a cor-
rection factor was determined as a function of the ra-
tio of intensities for each color ratio considered as

β =
(Si/Sj)

(Si/Sj)exp
. (5)

The correction factor functions obtained from the cal-
ibration images at know temperatures are shown in
Fig. 6. It should be mentioned that, due to limita-
tions of the equipment higher temperatures could not
be tested during the calibration and thus an extrap-
olation of the data had to be made. The correction
factor functions, β, are then used to correct the ratio
of SIBAL camera images ((Si/Sj)exp)] which will
then be replaced on the LHS of Eq. 4. Figure 5(a) also
shows the corrected intensity ratios using the correc-
tion factor of Eq. 5. Figure 5(b,c,d,e) shows the tem-
perature fields obtained from calibration images with
the furnace at 1273 K and the correction factors calcu-
lated. It is seen that with the correction factors, the ex-
tracted temperature fields approximate very well the
temperature of the furnace with the exception of the

Fig. 5: (a) Comparison between theoretical (solid line func-
tions) and measured intensity ratios with (squares) and with-
out (circles) the correction factor. Temperature fields deter-
mined with the calibration images at Tfurnace=1273K us-
ing different color ratios (b,c,d,e) and the correction factors
of Eq. 5

G/R ratio. The discrepancies observed with the G/R
ratio are generated because of the shape of the correc-
tion factor (β) curve that when applied to the intensity
ratios (Si/Sj) at lower temperatures generates more
than one plausible solution for an intensity ratio.

Fig. 6: Correction factor evolution as a function of tempera-
ture of the imaged object.

4. Flame temperature

During the spread process, after ignition is
achieved and the igniter is turned off, the flame

6



spreads uniformly along the surface of the sample. As
the flame spreads over the composite fabric, it con-
sumes most of the cotton, leaving behind the fiber-
glass mesh and some smoldering cotton residue. Dur-
ing this process, periodic images are taken of the
spread process. These images are later corrected for
perspective issues and processed to extract soot tem-
perature. Considering that the initial purpose of the
images recorded during the experiments was to use
the data to visualize the flame and track its evolu-
tion over time, i.e., pyrolysis length, flame size, etc.,
the cameras used in the experiments were set to auto-
matically modify their settings to better visualize the
flames. Due to this, some of the images would present
high levels of saturation, particularly near the center
of the flame, making it impossible to extract any rele-
vant information in the area. Thus, when performing
the color pyrometry ratios, channels green and blue
were preferred for determining the temperature.

Fig. 7: Comparison between the original data [5] (top),
B2CP temperature fields (center) and the temperature mea-
surement from the thermocouple (bottom).

Figure 7 shows the temperature field of the flame as
determined by the B2CP technique. This image was
selected to match the instant of time that the thermo-
couple measuring above the surface, in the fire plume,
reaches the peak recorded value (TCpeak), as shown
in the bottom portion of Fig. 7. The thermocouple
measurements have been corrected for radiation and
convection effects [25]. From the figure it is seen
that at the exact point of the thermocouple position,
B2CP gives a temperature close to 1369 K which is
relatively close to the 1426 K recorded by the device
at the same instant in time. This comparison vali-
dates both the technique and the correction functions

previously determined. The relative uncertainty asso-
ciated with the thermocouple reading has been esti-
mated following the work of Ren et al. [26]. A rela-
tive uncertainty for a type-R thermocouple of 0.25%
is considered, thus resulting in an overall correction
for radiation and convection effects of ± 6 K in the
measured value. The error for B2CP technique was
computed from a Monte Carlo propagation analysis,
considering a conservative error of 5% on the signal
ratio ΘG/R, resulting in 117 K of uncertainty for tem-
perature determination. With this, both measurements
are comparable within the error margin.

Figure 8 shows flame images at different selected
times after the test is initiated and ignition achieved,
together with the corresponding temperature fields.
At first, the flame shape for the large-scale sample
looks a bit distorted because the camera’s field of
view does not reach the entire sample holder. For
the initial 120 s, the flame kept its symmetrical shape
between the top and bottom part. After that, the top
flame seems to be pushed closer to the surface, getting
longer than the bottom flame. Towards the end of the
spread, only small smoldering spots were left burn-
ing some of the unconsumed fuel. The temperature
fields of Fig. 8 show that during the spread process
the flame temperature does not change very signifi-
cantly, staying constant at an average of 1305 K soon
after ignition and throughout the entire test. Lastly,
when looking at the results presented in Figs. 7 and
8, the reader should keep in mind that no tempera-
ture values could be determined near the center of the
flame (the most luminous part) because the saturation
level presented by the raw images made it impossi-
ble to extract any sort of useful information at those
locations. Given that issue, temperature values were
artificially set to 0 to be able to plot the entire flame
field.

5. Concluding remarks

The present paper presents a methodology and
analysis of broadband two color pyrometry technique
applied to a spreading diffusion flame in micrograv-
ity conditions. The proposed model is validated us-
ing numerical simulations and experimental measure-
ments of well-known coflow flames. The validation
process supports the major assumptions of the analy-
sis and shows that the technique provides an accept-
able average temperature, although it is biased to-
ward higher values. The processed RAW data from
the recorded images results in temperature in accor-
dance with thermocouple measurements of the plume
obtained during the experiment. The information ex-
tracted from the recorded images provides additional
insights of the flame characteristics observed during
the Saffire IV experiments, showing that the flame
temperature remains relatively constant during the en-
tire spread process. The application of this technique
in this configuration can be coupled with soot volume
fraction measurements in order to estimate the radia-
tive heat flux emitted by the flame, in order to design

7



Fig. 8: A sequence of images from the spreading flame in a forced flow in microgravity conditions. Images on the left show
snapshots as recorded from the camera after correcting for perspective issues [5]. Images on the right show the temperature
fields obtained with the B2CP technique. All images have the same scale.

fire safety strategies for spacecraft.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge the support of the NASA
Advanced Exploration Systems Division for the spon-
sorship of the Spacecraft Fire Safety Demonstration
Project and the Saffire experiments. The authors
would also like to thank Grunde Jomaas, Augustin
Guibaud, and Guillaume Legros for their insightful
comments. Maria Thomsen would also like to thank
Fondecyt 3200964.

References
[1] National Aeronautics and Space Administration,

NASA-STD-6001B Flammability, Offgassing, and
Compatibility Requirements and Test Procedures,
Tech. Rep. I, Washington, DC (2011).

[2] ECSS Secretariat, ECSS-Q-ST-70-21C Space product
assurance - Flammability testing for the screening of
space materials, Tech. Rep. February (2010).

[3] D. L. Urban, P. Ferkul, S. Olson, G. A. Ruff, J. S.
T’ien, Y.-t. T. Liao, A. C. Fernandez-Pello, J. L.
Torero, G. Legros, C. Eigenbrod, N. Smirnov, O. Fu-
jita, S. Rouvreau, B. Toth, G. Jomaas, Flame Spread
: Effects of Microgravity and Scale, Combustion and
Flame 199 (2019) 168–182.

[4] G. Jomaas, J. L. Torero, C. Eigenbrod, J. Niehaus, S. L.
Olson, P. V. Ferkul, G. Legros, A. C. Fernandez-Pello,
A. J. Cowlard, S. Rouvreau, N. Smirnov, O. Fujita,
J. S. T ’ien, G. A. Ruff, D. L. Urban, Fire safety in
space – beyond flammability testing of small samples,
Acta Astronautica 109 (2015) 208–216.

[5] D. L. Urban, G. A. Ruff, P. Ferkul, J. Easton, J. Owens,
S. Olson, M. Meyer, C. Fontenberry, J. E. Brooker,
J. Graf, M. Casteel, B. Toth, F. Meyer, C. Eigenbrod,
J. S. Tien, Y.-t. T. Liao, C. Fernandez-pello, G. Legros,

A. Guibaud, N. Smirnov, O. Fujita, G. Jomaas, Fire
Safety Implications of Preliminary Results from Saf-
fire IV and V Experiments on Large Scale Spacecraft
Fires, in: 50th International Conference on Environ-
mental Systems, 2021.

[6] G. A. Ruff, Microgravity Research in Spacecraft Fire
Safety, Halon Options Technical Working Confer-
ence (April) (2001) 13–22.

[7] H. D. Ross, Basics of Microgravity Combustion, in:
H. D. Ross (Ed.), Microgravity Combustion: Fire in
Free Fall, 2001, Ch. 1, pp. 1–33.

[8] S. Takahashi, M. Kondou, K. Wakai, S. Bhattachar-
jee, Effect of radiation loss on flame spread over a
thin PMMA sheet in microgravity, Proceedings of the
Combustion Institute 29 (2002) 2579–2586.

[9] J. Reimann, S. Will, Optical diagnostics on sooting
laminar diffusion flames in microgravity, Micrograv-
ity Science and Technology 16 (1) (2005) 333–337.

[10] J. Reimann, S. A. Kuhlmann, S. Will, Investigations on
soot formation in heptane jet diffusion flames by opti-
cal techniques, Microgravity Science and Technology
22 (4) (2010) 499–505.

[11] K. J. Santa, B. H. Chao, P. B. Sunderland, D. L. Urban,
D. P. Stocker, R. L. Axelbaum, Radiative extinction
of gaseous spherical diffusion flames in microgravity,
Combustion and Flame 151 (4) (2007) 665–675.

[12] M. Zhu, H. Zhang, G. Tang, Q. Liu, J. Lu, G. Yue,
S. Wang, S. Wan, Ignition of single coal particle in a
hot furnace under normal- And micro-gravity condi-
tion, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 32 II (2)
(2009) 2029–2035.

[13] A. Guibaud, J. L. Consalvi, J. M. Orlac’h, J. M.
Citerne, G. Legros, Soot Production and Radia-
tive Heat Transfer in Opposed Flame Spread over
a Polyethylene Insulated Wire in Microgravity, Fire
Technology (2019).

[14] A. Guibaud, J. M. Citerne, J. M. Orlac’H, O. Fujita,
J. L. Consalvi, J. L. Torero, G. Legros, Broadband
modulated absorption/emission technique to probe

8



sooting flames: Implementation, validation, and limi-
tations, Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 37 (3)
(2019) 3959–3966.

[15] A. Guibaud, J. M. Citerne, J. L. Consalvi, J. L. Torero,
O. Fujita, M. Kikuchi, P. V. Ferkul, N. Smirnov, G. Jo-
maas, B. Toth, S. Rouvreau, G. Legros, Accessing the
soot-related radiative heat feedback in a flame spread-
ing in microgravity: Optical designs and associated
limitations, in: Proceedings of the Combustion Insti-
tute, Vol. 38, Elsevier Ltd, 2021, pp. 4805–4814.

[16] T. P. Jenkins, R. K. Hanson, Soot pyrometry us-
ing modulated absorption/emission, Combustion and
Flame 126 (3) (2001) 1669–1679.

[17] M. Modest, Radiative Heat Transfer, Academic Press,
2013.

[18] R. Viskanta, M. P. Mengüç, Radiation heat transfer in
combustion systems, Progress in Energy and Combus-
tion Science 13 (2) (1987) 97–160.

[19] H. Chang, T. T. Charalampopoulos, Determination
of the Wavelength Dependence of Refractive Indices
of Flame Soot, Proceedings of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
430 (1880) (1990) 577–591.

[20] F. Liu, K. A. Thomson, G. J. Smallwood, Soot tem-
perature and volume fraction retrieval from spectrally
resolved flame emission measurement in laminar ax-
isymmetric coflow diffusion flames: Effect of self-
absorption, Combustion and Flame 160 (9) (2013)
1693–1705.

[21] J. J. Cruz, F. Escudero, E. Álvarez, L. F. Figueira da
Silva, G. Carvajal, M. Thomsen, A. Fuentes, Three-
wavelength broadband soot pyrometry technique for
axisymmetric flames, Optics Letters 46 (11) (2021)
2654.

[22] N. A. Eaves, Q. Zhang, F. Liu, H. Guo, S. B. Dworkin,
M. J. Thomson, Coflame: A refined and validated nu-
merical algorithm for modeling sooting laminar coflow
diffusion flames, Comput. Phys. Commun. 207 (2016)
464–477.

[23] J. J. Cruz, L. F. F. da Silva, F. Escudero, F. Cepeda,
J. C. Elicer-Cortés, A. Fuentes, Soot pyrometry by
emission measurements at different wavelengths in
laminar axisymmetric flames, Combustion Science
and Technology 194 (8) (2022) 1643–1660.

[24] American National Standard for Calibration, Calibra-
tion laboratories and measuring and test equipment -
General requirements, Tech. rep. (1994).

[25] C. R. Shaddix, Correcting Thermocouple Measure-
ments for Radiation Loss: A Critical Review, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd National Heat Transfer Confer-
ence, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1999, pp. 1–10.

[26] X. Ren, D. Zeng, Y. Wang, G. Xiong, G. Agarwal,
M. Gollner, Temperature measurement of a turbu-
lent buoyant ethylene diffusion flame using a dual-
thermocouple technique, Fire Safety Journal 120 (Jan-
uary) (2021) 103061.

9


